And I wanted to talk about
an alternative to insurance. It's the idea of managing
risk not through purchasing an insurance policy, but
through diversification. Through owning a variety of assets. And here again, we're going to
start by assuming a blank slate. You as an individual have no
risks that are inherent to you. You don't live in an earthquake zone. We're not going to worry about that. But you do have to take on risks
in order to get a good investment. So the idea is that risk
is inherent to investing. You can't, ultimately, people who
are providing you with investment opportunities are doing something
in the real world, which is risky. And if it weren't risky,
it wouldn't be giving you an extra return. That's the core idea
that we want to develop. And that you have to manage your risk by
diversifying across a number of different assets, not putting all
your eggs in one basket. So that's the core idea that
we want to develop today. So I said, put your eggs in one basket. I was wondering, you've heard that term. Don't put all your eggs in one basket. That's a very [INAUDIBLE]. Who said put all your eggs in one
basket and watch that basket. That might have been Mark Twain. I have to look it up. But, more famous is don't put
all your eggs in one basket. So, I tried to search where
did that first appear? And I found it in a book by Alexander
Crump in 1874 about how to invest. And then he says, there is an old saying. [LAUGH] That it is inadvisable to
have all your eggs in one basket. So he doesn't provide a reference for his old saying but that's the earliest
reference I could find for it. I like history of thought. I always wonder where it comes from. The portfolio theory approach
describes everyone as the same. We don't, we don't have risks
that have to be insured or we've already taken care of them. Any specific risk. I bought an insurance policy. And it's gone. So, that's the assumption. So, what if I calculate the optimal
portfolio, the best diversified portfolio? The insight, the core insight of
this theory is, you know what? It's going to be the same for everybody. I mean if I can serve quantified risks and
returns and I calculate the optimum. Then why is it different
from one person to another? Well, you could be different
from another person because you might be more
risk averse than others. You might have a greater or
lesser tolerance for risk. But that variation and tolerance to risk could be adjusted by
leveraging your portfolio up and down. So if you abstract from that adjustment,
really, everyone should be doing the same thing. That's the key insight. So all that should matter to you as an individual is the performance
of your whole portfolio, right? If you're a rational, economic person, an econ as they call them, why do you
care if one stock goes up or down? It's the total that matters to you. So, what you would naturally
care about is the mean and variance of the return
on your whole portfolio. And you just don't care about
what one asset or another does. Now, in fact, people boast about their investing
skill with regard to individual assets. But they shouldn't because you
win some and you lose some. It is the average that matters. So you care about the average
return of your total portfolio, and you care about how uncertain the total
return of the whole portfolio is. We are talking now about
the capital asset pricing model, which I think, it's due to
Harry Markowitz, in the early 1950s. He was a graduate student
at University of Chicago. He had this neat idea. I can write down how to optimize risk? I'll assume risk can be
described by a variance matrix, a little bit of technical apparatus,
and statistics. And I suppose I know what the expected
returns are in various assets. What should I do as a portfolio manager? And it was simple. It was like one page of math. He wrote it all down. Computed the optimal portfolio. And assuming that you know the variability of assets and their expected returns, it kind of amazes me that
It wasn't known before. But there are moments in history when
certain ideas suddenly crystallize. The idea of measuring risk
by a standard deviation. And then doing some calculations that
bring that down maybe to a minimum value or minimum compared to
some expected return. That led to a big revolution in finance. So, but it's a mathematical discipline,
not that we saw in class. I also think it can be overrated,
I love mathematical models like that, but they're not the whole story either. But the idea is that somehow
you have to take account of each asset that you invest in. How does it contribute to your
overall portfolio variance and portfolio expected return? And there's a lot of
complexity in the decision. Sometimes you want to be hold
the positive amount of an asset, sometimes you want to
hold a negative amount. And what you hold depends not just
on that asset's expected return, but on the expected return of other assets and
their covariance with this asset. It all sounds impossibly
difficult problem, but it really isn't that difficult. It's simple calculus. Harry Markowitz just worked it out in his
room at the university City of Chicago. And it's with us ever since. So that was one thing I wanted
to cover early in the course. because I just like the model. I don't trust it either [LAUGH] but
I like it.