We are talking today about
Investment Banks and Money Mangers. These are the people
who manage investments. Investing used to be more of an individual
thing, it's still is for some people. But more increasingly,
there's an intermediary between you and your investment. But of course, I'm talking not about
commercial banks or regular banks but investment banks. And other kinds of intermediaries
like mutual fund managers, ETF, exchange traded fund managers etc. So this is the reality
of the modern world and I thought we need to talk about it for
this course. So we'll start with investment banks. So what do investment banks do? They traditionally do no accept deposits, they're not members of
the Federal Reserve System. There's no FDIC insuring them,
well they don't even have deposits. And so commercial banks take deposits and
make loans. Investment banks don't take deposit and
don't make loans. But in fact they under write securities. But what does it mean to
under write a security? It means you're the guy that
companies go to, or non profits or even governments go to,
when they want to raise money, and they do it with you as a broker,
intervening. To underwrite a security means to manage
the process of issuing new shares in companies or issuing debt for companies,
or as I said, for other organizations. Now just to give some names. The term bulge-bracket,
I looked it up on anagrams. It only goes back to the 1980s,
so it's not huge O. But the bulge-bracket
firms are the big firms. So, first Boston, but they're mostly not pure investment banks anymore. So first, Boston. Actually, it was an outgrowth
of the national, I think it's called
the National Bank of Boston. But it became an investment
bank in New York, big time, but it was acquired
by a Swiss bank, Credit Suisse. Goldman Sachs was,
until their financial crisis in 2008, was a investment bank. It was forced by regulation to
become a bank holding company. And so now, they're regulated as a bank. And they might as well accept deposits. So they are in fact, there was news last
year that Goldman Sachs had bought $16 billion of deposits from General Electric,
the financial arm of General Electric. So they are now a bank. You can deposit money in Goldman Sachs. I don't know if it's up and
running yet, but they don't have corner offices or
ATM machines. So they're not really what you
think of as a commercial bank. But they're not a pure
investment bank either, so they have an investment banking division. >> Can I ask a question? >> Yes. >> Professor, you have discussed a lot
about how the business of investment banking are, how they're based on people's
trust, and I used to be a US banker. I [INAUDIBLE] echo that. I'm just wondering about your opinion, how about the current stature
of the US banks, I mean after the financial crisis and how do you
think they can improve their public image? >> Well, I think investment bankers have
a better public image than undertakers. Every occupation has its public attitude. So, actually I don't think people
are overall extremely like movies about investment bankers
are usually, very negative, right? They're usually criminals practically. But if you have one living next door, you've probably don't because he
lives in the rich neighborhood. [LAUGH] But if you did you'd probably
think he's an okay guy, he or she is an okay person. So, I think there's something about
the way I view it is that finance is an important technology. Many people don't view it this way. It's not about shifting papers around and making obscured deals that
exclude someone else. It's about making things happen for
any good activity has to be financed. And when you get people together to do
something important, they start worrying, they have risks that they're concerned
about and they're wondering is this for me or not, or maybe I'm out of here. Maybe they'll do a cynical
job as an employee. So you have to incentivize people,
you have to protect them from risks. We are living in an age of
financial capitalism and it may create an inequality and
problems like that. But it also create tremendous economic growth that we've
been seeing around the world. Since in the last half century
particularly when there was a greater appreciation of finance. So I think that there is mistrust and
hostility sometimes. And especially after
the financial crisis recently. But I think it's manageable and
one shouldn't not go into finance. I think, maybe politician are lower
esteemed than finance people. And that's also an important thing for
people to do. And you shouldn't stay
away from that one either.