So today I wanted to talk about crises,
misbehavior, and regulation, it's a huge topic,
financial regulation. So I wrote a book with George Akerlof
called Phishing for Phools. We're using the word phishing more
generally than its usually mean, to mean manipulation or deception. And we inclined a new word phool. Well actually,
it's already a Hindi word, and it's used in India in English to mean a
flower, I guess, or it's somebody's name. But for us, phool with a P-H is
somebody who doesn't appreciate how much he or she is being manipulated
[LAUGH], and most people are phools. That we want to open their
eyes to manipulation. So regulation is substantially aimed
at dealing with human problems and with manipulation and deception. We just talked about it for example,
with the mortgage regulation, which is intensive. It has to be detailed because there's so
much involved. So many people playing games,
they're not all playing games. One theme of our book here,
is that it's not that people are bad, it's that people
are constrained by the market. If everybody else is doing something,
you have to do it too, or you won't stay in business. If there’s some manipulation that works,
so for example when you go to the store,
this is a trivial example. You go to the store and look at prices
you'll see something priced at $9.99. Now you think, wait a minute why
don't they just round that to $10? Well you know why they don't,
there's a psychological tendency to just look at the first digit, or
to count how many digits in the price. You don't want to add another digit,
and go from $9 to $10. You're playing a trick,
it's phishing as we define it. Why do you do this? You do this because everyone else is
doing it, and in a competitive market with narrow profit margins you can't
escape it, you've got to do it too. I remember in my own company, Allan Wise
called me one night, Case Shiller Wise, and he said, what should we price
our online mortgage service? We had an online,
I think we were the first, I am sorry, we gave price estimates for
individual homes. You'd type in your address, and
then we would give you an estimated value, instantly, based on our models. Zillow later came in and took over that
business, but we've had it for a while. What should we price it? The question is should we
price it at $29.99, or $30? And we fell in a quandary,
because you know that business is better if you lower the price
a little bit below a pricing point. But we finally decided no
we don't play that game, we're a firm of integrity and
we priced it at $30. But you know what we had no competitors,
there was nobody else on the web at that time, giving you an instant value for
your house. So it didn't matter,
we did all right, finally. We sold that company by the way in 2002,
a long time ago. But I remember the doubts we
had about playing the game, and some companies stay above it. But you can't do it in
a tightly competitive market, you can stay above it,
but you'll be thrown out. You won't make any profits,
and you'll go out of business. That's what we call
the Phishing Equilbirum. So you need regulation, and
our book is a plea for regulation. And when I mentioned that
the QRM rule was 689 pages long, I'm not saying it was evil or corrupt. I'm saying they're dealing with a very
complex problem, and a huge industry, with tons of lawyers
representing their interest. I have to hand it to the people
in the regulatory agency, it looks like they came up with
a reasonable set of regulations. Now one thing we have to do is
distinguish between microprudential and macroprudential regulation. Actually, these words are,
I haven't looked them up on Engram, but I think the word macroprudential is a
relatively new word in the last ten years. Most regulation in the past has been
to protect individuals from abuse. But now after the financial crisis,
that's called microprudential, because it was looking at one guy or
one small business. Macroprudential is regulation
to help prevent big crisis, big events, the macro economy. And it's a revolution in regulation that
occurred since the financial crisis, that regulators are not just there
to protect you as a stockholder, or you as a purchaser of a product. It's to protect the whole economy,
business wants regulation. Well when you bring up
a specific regulation, there will always be some business
people who will oppose it. Namely the business people who's
interests are harmed by the regulation. But on the other hand, business people
want regulation, because they don't want to live in a system that forces
them to do corrupt things, or to do things that are obviously
not in the public interest. They would rather compete in an
environment that encourages good behavior, otherwise they're forced to having
the lowest common denominator. It's analogy to sports events and
you have a referee. Do the players want a referee? Sure they want the referee,
they want it to be a good game. They don't want rough-housing, they don't
want someone who's going to kill them during the game, or risk killing them,
or give them lifetime injuries. They want a regulator, but of course when
they get regulated, when they referee says you've just committed a foul,
they object at that point. But players, they have a hate
relationship with regulators, but they know that they need regulators,
namely referees. >> With more regulation obviously
the key is to lower the risk, but do you think by doing that,
is that hindering the entrepreneur? >> Right. >> And all of these being [INAUDIBLE]? >> Yeah there is a trade off there. I've found in a couple of
companies in my life, and I am very aware of the lags that
were imposed on us by regulators. But on the other hand,
the regulators I met, I thought were impressive people and
public spirited, that was my impression. So I don't know that they're
not driving a good balance.