What do you think has been
important about the innovation of people's ability to insure
against risk in the marketplace? Whether it's through just something
as simple as an insurance contract or by other means? >> Well, the history of risk management
goes back thousands of years. I would say that the history
of risk management is, the technology that we have has been
very slow to develop over the centuries. And that encourages me to think that
it has a lot more to develop yet, a lot more to develop yet. I think that there's
an inherent conservationism and mistrust of new financial arrangements. In the sense that, I'm not coming to this party unless
the in-people coming to it also. And so things are very slow to develop. I don't know if I'm
answering your question. It is a belief of mine that financial innovation is a pillar
of our civilization. That it's not just
shifting papers around and getting people to sign documents that
trick them into signing away something. It's a sequence of inventions
that incentivize people, provide capital for enterprises. Create organizations that last
through time that separate themselves from the objectives of the individuals
who comprise the corporation. And get people focused on some
common good that will be produced. >> Do you think it's safe
to say that historically, financial innovation has
occurred on the upside? Looking to capture new markets and
new ways of earning returns, versus on the, kind of the downside
risk management side of the ledger. >> Well, when we say risk management,
it seems to imply a focus on the downside. But it's on the upside as well,
because people accept the downside risk because there's something on the plus
side that is enticing and is exciting. So this is an interesting point, people seem to like gambles that involve a small amount of money
lost with high probability. And a large money gained
with low probability. So if that's what people like,
we have to try to turn the natural risks which might be balanced equally into loss
and gain into something more appealing. So that's one thing that
limited liability did. People like lottery tickets. I paid $2 today, and
I have the chance of winning $10 million. For some reason, the chance is minuscule. It's virtually zero, but
somehow people like that. So that's a discovery of our human nature. Why they like that is a puzzle but
we just know that people like that. It's because people savor
the small probability. I have this lottery ticket
I bought this morning. I could be worth $10 million at the end
of the day when they announce the number. That just makes your day bright. And then, when you don't win, you still
feel well, it was just $2, so what. So what limited liability
does is it creates that for corporate, that same sense for
investing in stock. You bought 100 shares,
so maybe that's $3,000. That's a little bit more
than a lottery ticket. But hey, I could be a multimillionaire
if I bought the right company. It's like a lottery ticket. So people flock to these things. And they're actually,
they're disappointed almost always. But they're not disappointed
because we end up with a more vital business sector
where things are created. So we have to try to reframe things. That's what part of
financial innovation is. Reframe risk so that they're appealing. And we want to also, for good social
purpose to be risks that need to be taken. So that they benefit the economy.