Think of risk, I was wondering how these
large hedge funds and their ability to take on large amounts of risk and leverage
themselves, how that affects the market? >> Well hedge funds
are investment companies that are not approved for
the general retail market. So they're not allowed to advertise. They're not well-known, because they're
not allowed to promote themselves, except through private conversations,
and to invest in them you have to be an accredited investor,
not a general investor. So they are allowed to do
sophisticated and dangerous things. The idea is a hedge fund is regulated for people who have professional advisors or
family offices. You know what a family office is? If you are really rich you
don't just hire an advisor. You get a team of advisers, who that's their whole job,
is to work on your family investments. That's what hedge funds are really for. So they're dangerous because they're not, it's like taking drugs. [LAUGH] You need a physician to,
between you and the drugs. Then, so often in the past hedge
funds have done really well. In recent years, they haven't been doing
well, on average, for the most of them. So I don't know that I recommend them. I can't recommend them as a group. But if you're,
do you have a family office? [LAUGH] I assume you don't. >> Unfortunately I do not.
>> [LAUGH] >> If your family office recommends it, go for it,
if you've selected them carefully. But they just represent claiming to
be the most sophisticated investors. Another notable thing about hedge funds,
is that traditionally they pay very high rewards to their investments
managers if they out perform. But that comes out of your pocket. And there are skeptics of hedge fund
saying, I would never pay those high management, those expenses,
to the people who invest my money. Because nobody can deserve that amount,
and so hedge funds in a sense are, at least many of them,
have been a bubble in themselves. They were doing well for awhile. The impression was that they were doing
well, lots of people piled into them, and lately they haven't been doing so
well. >> I guess really that these big financial
institutions, can take on a lot of risk, and this risk that they take on has a
potential to cause mass financial crises. Should there be a way to
regulate this risk or how much of this risk should be
regulated versus how much is it important to the inherent way that
these institutions are working? >> Yeah, well, I think that we
are in a situation where we had heightened recognition of
the importance of regulating for dealing with big risks that,
systemic risk. So a systemic risk is a risk that
the whole system will collapse, like a house of cards, some people say. Regulation before 2008-2009 crisis, was mostly micro-credential. That means they wanted to make sure
that you as an investor weren't being ripped off by this stockbroker
who was squirreling away your money or doing something like that. They were thinking of
you as an individual. But we've now had new impetus for
macro-credential regulation, and it's now regulation about how
interconnected are you with other, or some big business connected, and what will happen if that other
business fails to this business? So we want to, or if there's a world financial crisis,
how will this business fare? So, since the 2008-2009 financial crisis, we 've seen a lot more
macro-credential regulation and a lot more measures of risk
that are being developed. There are now what we call
stress tests of financial institutions that emphasize more
on their interconnectedness, and how they would act, how they would fair
in various kinds of international crisis. >> What are some measure of risk,
I guess, post 2008 crisis now, that are more appropriate to measuring? >> How accurate are these measures? >> Yeah, well there's a,
that's a controversy. Before the crisis,
there was regulation, it's not new, and there was some concern
with macroprudential. For example, before the crisis,
there was a method called value at risk, that was used
to measure the risk of a company. By looking at the assets and
liabilities of the company and considering what the probability of big direction in the values would be and
what it would mean for the company. But after the financial crisis we now have
more elaborate assessments of macro risk, and the stress tests will consider,
well the government regulator will specify that the financial
institution should estimate how it would be affected by
various kinds of financial crises. So, it's getting more detailed, and
more effort is being put into it. That's because the 2008 crisis
caught us all off guard, and people just didn't know
how interconnected banks, and other financial institutions were, and
they had to act in ignorance as a guess. Because their, too much of their data
collection was micro-credential. >> I have one more question. >> Yeah. >> It's about going back to the ideal of
measuring risks so in class you mentioned, Nassim Taleb's idea of the Black Swans. And he said that all these models to
measure risk are, if you read his book, are fundamentally flawed because they
don't take into account this super run like improbable events. >> Right, right.
>> Where you consider the financial crisis into the [INAUDIBLE] was
one of those events. So do you think there's ways to improve
this model to take into account more unlikely events that this platforms,-
>> Yeah. >> The method is fundamentally
flawed to take into account. >> Right.
So you're referring to Nassim Taleb, who had a book called the Black Swan,
that talked about rare, low-probably events as
being sometimes really big. >> Yeah. >> So you can work a lifetime creating a, creating wealth under certain assumptions
that something can't happen and then bang. Everything, you've lost everything for your whole lifetime,
because you thought it couldn't happen. That's kind of what happened
in the recent crisis, people thought that home prices can
never fall, because they never have or they never have since
the Great Depression [LAUGH] and so- >> [INAUDIBLE] >> I know that's a perfect example, but this it's how to deal with academically. If you're talking about rare, big events, well you don't have enough data
on them because they're rare. So, it's a problem. So, things that happen in the market, this
is what efficient market people sometimes say, that the markets have to deal with
the probability of these rare big events. But they are so intangible and they
are just something that i can't quantify. But when the market goes down,
Eugene Farmer might say [LAUGH], when the market goes down,
don't just assume it's crazy. Maybe it is some subtle evidence about
some big event that could happen. So I gotta give it,
that is a possible interpretation. We just never know. I wish there weren't these
big black swan events, finance would be so
much better a [LAUGH] profession to be in. Unfortunately, we live in a real world. [LAUGH] I shouldn't put it like that. >> [LAUGH]
>> We live in a world with the risk of huge events. >> So we have so many risks in our life,
like as we said, if you go into a labor
market during a recession. Or basically, if something bad happens,
like you need to find a way to hedge it, we have stuff for, like hedging
against oil risk or agricultural risk. Are there any innovative
financial products for hedging against the labor market risks? >> I'm glad you asked that question
[LAUGH] because this has been a theme of mine for a long time,
that we should have labor market risk. Now we do have something. Unemployment insurance was started in
the United Kingdom, I think it was 1911. The idea is temporary assistance for
finding a good job. Now they realized, they're in the UK, that people often are desperate
when they lose their job. They have a family, and
often people no savings. So what the person does is takes,
has to, take the first job offer, and it's often not a very good
career track for them, and so it's hard for them to move to another job. So, let's give them time, let's give them
may be six months of support so that they can find the right job, and also give
them some kind of help in finding a job. They will have a career service for them. That's an old idea. The question is whether we can do more. The unemployment insurance is really
focused on finding a job in the short run. But now there's a problem that we're
seeing inequality grow in many places around the world, and we see a lot
of people who are complaining differently, that often it occurs
when they're middle age, say they're 50 years old and
they lose their job. They suddenly find themselves,
I mean they can get some job, but they can only get those bad jobs. Somehow people want to hire young people
and they'd have to be retrained, and someone doesn't want to retrain them,
because right now it stays long, and so they have a problem. So one idea,
I call it livelihood insurance, this is kind of a futuristic idea,
but this is not just, there is Larry and Robert another couple of the economists wrote
a paper about 15 years ago. For this similar idea,
they called it wage insurance. So their idea is when somebody
loses their job and has to take a job at a lower wage, they should be
able to collect on an insurance policy. Interestingly, President Obama
brought this idea up during his State of the Union address for
2016. So the President of the United States
appears behind this idea. Unfortunately, a lot of ideas
that President Obama has been behind don't happen. >> [LAUGH]
>> But the other thought of it, he was proposing to be
some government insurance. I don't see why it has to
be exclusively government. There could be private insurers or private markets that would help
protect people against loss of income. But I think it's actually very important
now, more so than in the past, because of the rapid increase in
information technology on robotics, and the rapid globalization. So things can happen really
fast that make one's investment in human capital obsolete. And absolutely, there should be
risk management devices for that. And the important thing,
as I've argued in my books, [LAUGH] is if you help people manage
risks, they will take more risks. That's what we want. We want people, in their decisions about
their education, to do some risk-taking. Develop some specialty that
is at risk of being obsolete, but who knows, nobody knows. You're taking a chance. Let's encourage people to take chances.