So commercial real estate. Real estate partnership is an example
of a direct participation program. In order to buy in to
a real estate partnership you have to be an accredited investor, which is defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission in Washington D.C. as in terms of your wealth and
your income. Now it used to be you had to have
more than $1 million of investable wealth in your name, excluding your house. Or an income of $200,000 a year or more. How many of you are accredited investors? I won't ask for a show of hands. [LAUGH] You might have to
achieve a certain age too, to be an accredited investor. But the idea is,
we will protect the small investors against fraud and being cheated
because they don't have lawyers and can't afford lawyers and
advisers and they are so vulnerable. But if you're rich, the government says
all right, you have your advisers. Will they let you invest more generally? Other countries have similar divisions. So it's not just the US. That makes sense, right? You have to protect ignorant people. Not everyone is smart. We can't let the crazy
schemes prey on them. Okay, so a real estate partnership is for
accredited investors and a limited partnership means
you have limited liabilities. At least the limited partners
have limited liability. Direct participation or
flow through vehicles, they escape corporate profits tax. But their profits become your income. The IRS has various requirements. One of them is that a DPP
can't be perpetual. It has to have a limited life. Corporations derive a lot of their value
from the fact that they go on forever. Once a company establishes a reputation, it has value that will last
maybe hundreds of years. Or if not that long,
at least many decades. But a DPP is supposed to be for
a particular life. That means, for example, you would buy
an apartment building, a typical DPP. You'd get a small number of partners,
rich people who buy into your partnership. And then you say that in 20 years we'll
sell the building, and then we close down. So you've satisfied the IRS requirements
for a pass-through vehicle, and you don't have to take corporate
profits tax which is a big advantage. The general partner runs the business and
does not have limited liability. Must own at least 1%. Limited partners are passive investors,
just rich people typically, and they can replace the general partner. And they sell units to investors and give performance based compensation to the
general partner who's taking the risks. Now there were complaints
about these limited, they were trying to
protect small investors. But, when that left small investors
unable to invest in real estate. In 1960, the US Congress created
something called a REIT, Real Estate Investment Trust. And I believe the US
was the first country. But I shouldn't say that I know that. There's so many things that happen. Often, the US is not the first to do
something but it becomes a leader in finance, a leader toward a movement,
so something will happen. But it was new,
definitely in the US, in 1960. So the complaint was, I, a little guy,
just can't invest in all of these buildings that have been making so
much money for rich people. It's unfair. So, the US government created
a new kind of investment vehicle called a REIT, that would be
available to small investors, and they'd be regulated to be safe. But it wouldn't necessarily be safe,
because you're investing in a real estate, and if a real estate goes bad. But at least they won't
be taken advantage of. And they also get the tax break. You could have set up a corporation
before this that owned real estate, but they would be paying
corporate profit tax. Now REITs are getting much bigger. They've been over a half a century now,
and they're now in many countries. But US is still the biggest
source of REITs. So the law restricts REITs. So they're not going to pay
the corporate profits tax, so they don't want to let
corporations call themself a REIT. A company could say, wow, we own real
estate, we own the factory and so we're a REIT. No way, you can't call yourself
a REIT to escape taxes. So they had to define it. So they defined it that 75% of the assets
must be in real estate or cash. And 75% of the income must
come from real estate. And 90% of their income must
be from real estate dividend, interest and capital gains,
and 95% has to be paid out. Now here's where the dividend
earnings ratio is set by law. They've gotta pay out their earnings. And also, they wanted to discourage, No more than 30% of the income from sale of
properties held for less than four years. They wanted it to be long-term investing,
not turning over rapidly. So starting in 1960,
there was a REIT boom, and that was followed by a recession and a drop in property prices
into the early 70s. There was a second boom after
the tax reform of 1986, eliminated many of
the advantages of partnerships. It used to be that DPPs could do
fancy arithmetic on their taxes that you got, which would make them very
advantageous, notably you could depreciate by favorable rules that reduced your taxes
even if the depreciation wasn't real. So they made it less profitable
in 1986 to invest in a DPP. And then there was a third boom
starting in 1992 when many companies, after, there's also a time when a lot of specialized REITs developed
to appeal to investor interest. So you can buy a golf course REIT. Remember, real estate is about
structures and property, so golf courses apparently satisfied
the idea of investing in property, and you can do a golf course REIT. Or many different kinds or REITs. >> You describe how human psychology explains a lot of the price movements
in housing, in real estate. >> Mm-hm. >> But if we don't consider those,
if we absent any psychological factors, what would the long term
housing price index look like? >> Okay.
I never actually went through that exercise. If you look in my book I have
a plot of home prices since 1890, and construction cost since 1890. So maybe it would look more
like construction costs. So remarkably, if you correct for
CPI inflation, construction costs haven't
gone up a lot in 100 years. In fact, for
the last few decades they've been sagging. Why is that? Well, I think it's because
there's technical progress. We mass produce things now. They used to plaster by hand
on now they put drywall up. It's cheaper and quicker. Things are pre-made, you just stick
them in place, mass produced. So, that limits the rate of
growth of construction costs. And I think prices, if that were the only factor then prices
would look like construction costs. That's what people often have said, economists have often said that prices
are just driven by construction costs. But those economists wrote before
the recent bubble in home prices. [COUGH] They're getting more,
they're more psychological. There's more attention, the psychology
of the housing market has changed. If you went back to the 19th century, it's hard to find many real estate
bubbles that [COUGH] you do find them. For example,
in the 19th century in Manhattan and Los Angeles, and few other places as well. But what did Manhattan and
Los Angeles have in common? They were glamorous places. They were glamorous back then. Beautiful weather in Los Angeles, and
also a shortage of space to build, at least especially in Manhattan. So in those places they had housing
bubbles, but not everywhere. So something happened in the late
20th century that got people, and not just in the US in many places, got many people thinking that real
estate was really going to be scarce. I think it had something to do with
the free market revolution that started in Britain with
Margaret Thatcher and in the United States with Ronald Reagan,
and then in China with Dung Chow Ping. There was a move over much of
the world towards free market, which I think on the whole
was a good thing. But, it also had its consequences. It led people to think,
we used to be a society where we appreciated the working men or
women, and we would protect them. Now everyone's gotta watch out for
themselves, and they started to have a fear that housing
would just get beyond affordability. And that kind of is still with us, that the home prices are just going
to go way up and you better buy now. Now you don't see that so much in that, I looked through old
newspapers for ideas like that. Maybe in Manhattan,
if you want a house in Manhattan. I remember reading from
the 1880s someone saying, it's hard to find a building that's less
than six stories tall that's going up now? [LAUGH] You can't just buy a house in
Manhattan anymore, and it's still true, and it's still expensive there.