Now I wanted to give you a lesson, which,
I somehow have the impression you learned in high school,
did you learn compound interest? It's supposed to be such a basic math
point but let me just reiterate it. Suppose there's an annual rate of interest
r, and suppose that you're putting your money in a savings account in a bank
that promises to compound once per year. What does that mean? That means that your interest is
applied to the account once a year and you start earning interest on your
interest at the end of the year. So if I put $100 into an account
paying 3% compounding once a year, and
I go to the bank after six month and I say I'd like to cash out of my account,
what's it worth? They would say $100.00 because we haven't
credited your annual interest yet. So then you go [LAUGH] if you wait a full
year you can come back to the bank and now you get $103, now your account
is marked up for compounding. If you go back to the bank in 18
months since you deposited it, and you ask for your money,
they'd say well now you have $103 [LAUGH] because we haven't credited your
new interest for this year. You have to wait two years and
after two years how much do you have? You have 1.03 times $1.03, is little over $1.06,
if you have annual compounding. Now the banks often compound
more often than once a year so suppose they compound twice per year. You put in $100 in a 3% compounding twice
per year, if you went to get your money in the first six months,
you would still just get $100 back. After six months, you'd get $101.50, if you went back after nine months,
you'd get $101.50. You'd have to wait two years, no,
one full year, did I say that right? Yeah, you'd have to wait a full year and then you would get 1.015
squared times $100. You see where we're going on this,
if it's compounded twice per year the balance is 1 plus r
over 2 times 2t after t years. Where t is any number,
which is either one or, one plus, it's either an integer or an integer plus a half,
in between it's a step function. And if it's compounded n-times a year, the balance is one plus r
over n to the nt-th period. Now if you take the limit of this
expression as n goes to infinity, you get what's called
continuous compounding, and then the balance is e to the rt,
where e is the natural number. So if they continuously compound, it improves your interest
payments a little bit more, unless r is really big it's not, or t is
really big, it's not a huge difference.