Now the idea is the price of a stock should be the present discounted
value of expected dividends. We'll come back to present values last,
but what we have here is that,
oops, the price is equal to what I'm assuming
earnings equals dividends. Price equals earnings
divided by a discount factor, which is the discount rate minus
the growth rate of earnings. So price equals earnings over some number. This is called the Gordon model. So and these are not necessarily
exactly today's earnings, but we'll use that as an approximation. So what it implies then is that unless the
risk factor is different from some stock to another making for a different discount
rate, the price earnings ratio should be the same in every stock,
that's the Gordon model. So efficient market theory has
to explain why some companies are priced higher relative to
their earnings than others. And it would have to be,
if you believe the Gordon model, it have to be something about risk or
growth opportunities. So if you're company is price high
relative to earnings it would either have to be because it's low
risk as measured by beta, so we willing to pay more for
it because it's low risk. Or would have to be that people
have reason to think that they're earning path the gross rate g is high. So that you're dividing
by a smaller number. So the efficient markets here
able to tribute, it would explain differences in
price relative to earnings. In terms of either the discount rate or
the growth rate of earnings. So that this markets are all priced right, even though in some markets the price
is high relative to earnings. So if this then gets that some stocks
are much more expensive than others. Some sell at a price earnings ratio of
as much as, sometimes is even more, but let's say 100 times earnings. And you might ask, why would anyone
pay 100 times earnings for a stock? Well, efficient market theory would say,
well, in its infinite wisdom, the market has decide either
that this stock is very good, in terms of risk, that's r, or that the growth rate of the earnings of
this company is going to be phenomenal. So that high price-earnings ratio should
predict high growth rates of earnings. So these are ideas, why do people
think markets ought to be efficient? There's the marginal investor. The smart guys are the ones
that trade regularly. They trade fast and immediately,
and they dominate trading. There's also a survival
of the fittest argument. That some people go to Wall Street who
look smart, but they're really not smart. [LAUGH]
>> On the P/E ratios though, do you think that different industries
should have different P/E ration averages? >> Good question. There are historic long run
differences across industries, and across countries in price earnings ratios. A good example is Japan. Which if you go back to the 1980s had, the overall Japanese market had a price
earnings ratio almost up to 100. People back then were
saying in everywhere, but Japan, they were saying this is crazy,
what with those Japanese? That's too high, but if you go to Japan,
it seemed different. I actually did a questionnaire
survey comparing US and Japan, attitudes towards the Japanese market, and
I know this is true that US people where as highly skeptical, but
the Japanese were very enthusiastic. So the price earnings ratios did
come way down in Japan after that. I think it's because the Japanese,
they're human like all, I'm not criticizing the Japanese, but they got kind of carried away with their
success and they bid the price up. And that can be a psychological cause for
differences and it can be prolonged differences
in price earnings ratios. There could also be other
of course differences, like differences in accounting standards.