So now I want to make a very basic
point about corporations and shares. If I give you 1,000 shares
in a company and you wonder, what does that mean that
I own 1,000 shares? You have to ask another question which is,
how many shares at there had standing? So we talked about this before. I'm not up to date on this but it might share of the company is
equal to the total number of shares I own divided by the total number of
shares outstanding for the company. So it's my number
relative to the tutorial. If I own half of the shares outstanding
then I own half of the company. Companies do things called splits
where they will break a share in 2, and call one share another 1.5 shares or
2 shares or whatever. They do that periodically. Why do they do that? It seems that companies think that
there's an optimal price per share that encourages investors look right,
feels right. And so they will change the number
of shares from time to time to try to hit a target for
the price per share. In the United States, by tradition, the target price per share is
something like $30 a share. So suppose your company
has done very well and the price per share which was
originally $30 is now up to $60. Your board of directors may then, someone might bring it up at the board
meeting, we should do a two-for-one split to get our share price back
down to the magic $30 a share. So then you would then send out a letter
to all of your shareholders and saying, we're doubling
the number of shares, and by the way this year, you now have
twice whatever you did before. Well, I put down my slides. This is essentially meaningless. Other doing is changing
the unit of measurement, it's like going between [FOREIGN] and
[FOREIGN]. It means nothing. By the way they even do it. Well, why not? One reason they do it is they just
think if the share price gets too high, you can't buy a fraction of the share. It gets to expensive, and people like to buy in round lots
because the brokers encourage that. About 100 shares. So if it's $30 a share, you can buy
an investment round lot for $3,000. But it gets expensive if you don't split. Now one company that doesn't
split is Berkshire Hathaway. That's Warren Buffet's company. And it's been selling for
thousands of dollars per share. So you can't even buy a round lot unless
you a substantially wealthy person. Warren Buffet does that
out of some principle. He can do it. Or I should say, his board does that. They can do it because
it's all meaningless. But not totally meaningless just that it
gets hard device small amount of share. You can buy one share but
you can't buy a half of share. So now the company is defined
as I said in basic terms, by a board of directors. The company has a constitution,
called the Corporate Charter, and the Corporate Charter defines
how things are done, but the general principle is
guided by state laws. It's state governments that manage. You have to incorporate in a state, which means you choose a state
to make your headquarters in. And that state then restricts what you
can put into the corporate charter. Delaware is the most popular state for
incorporating, because, well, it's the smallest
state in the United States and smallest states have an incentive to
be very generous to corporations, and they will all move to your state and
you end up making money. Big states wouldn't do that because
they already have corporations we need to be there. So the corporate law in
the state defines the rights and responsibilities of shareholders and
the board of directors. Well, it might say something
about dividends but it doesn't tell the company
what to pay out. This is something that's often forgotten. You buy shares in
a company to get dividends. >> [SOUND] A dividend is a distribution of
money from the company's earnings to its shareholders. [SOUND]
>> That's why, in America at least, especially, we're very clear. Why would you buy share in a company? Hey, they pay dividends. It's like interest except its variable. And tends to grow through time. Whereas, debt contracts doesn't grow,
it's just fixed. So you're doing it for the dividends. Remember we had the return on
a corporation has two components, the capital gains which is the
appreciation in the price per share and the dividends. So people tend to talk so
much about the capital gains. The movement of the market,
they forget about dividends. Some people don't even know
there are [LAUGH] dividends. That's actually the whole reason for
being for the stock market. Ideally anyway,
you buy shares to get dividends. And, in fact, if you look at history,
up until recent times, most of the returns you get on
the stock market are in the dividends. People think, well no,
isn't it just that the market has soared? Well, historically, over 100 years,
dividends are more important. The stock market goes up and
down, creates capital gains and capital losses, but
dividends are what it's all about. So companies don't have to pay a dividend
but typically young companies don't. Once they're mature they like
to start paying dividends and it signals to the world that
they're really making money. If you're investing a company
that never pays the dividend, you start to wonder,
is this real or is this a fraud? I never get a penny from them. So once they're into making money, they think it impresses investors
to get dividend checks. All right, I remember my own company. We incorporated in Delaware. My first company,
Case-Shiller Weiss Incorporated. And we didn't have to pay a dividend. I remember we had a board meeting
where we talked about exactly this. We've never paid a dividend. We gave shares to a lot of
our employees as incentive. But someone said,
they don't even believe in it. Nothing has ever happened. So we should pay a dividend. But we didn't. We held on. The employers eventually did
well when we sold the company. They found out that their shares
really were worth something. But we should have started paying
dividends and make it clearer. We didn't. So when a company pays a dividend,
what happens to the share price? Well, very simple, it drops because
the company used to have the money and now it doesn't. It paid it out. The share price pretty much has to drop
and I don't suppose it always does. Because funny things happen but the basic idea is that a share drops
in value when a dividend is paid. But I have to qualify that. It doesn't drop in value when you get
the check in the mail for you dividend. That would be variable anyway, right? They don't necessarily pay
them out in the exact moment. So a company has to define what
they call an X dividend date. That means, they will pay out
the dividend, this dividend, typically chorally dividend
every three months. They'll pay out this dividend to
shareholders of record on this date. So company values drop routinely
on the ex dividend date. That doesn't mean bad news
about the company at all. >> So I had a question about companies and
different dividend payment systems. So some companies like to boast
about they always pay dividends. They never miss it. Why would they want to emphasize this? And what would happen if they had
to cut back on their dividends or they don't miss their
dividends in a period? >> Well, I think this is an essentially
behavioral human question. So the reason they don’t want to
miss a dividend is because they think that will harm
the investor support. They don’t want to see
their stock price fall. If the investors lose confidence in
the company, these tag price can fall and then the management starts to
worry that that'll be taken over. If the price gets too low, take over, people will think, I'll buy it and
I will shut it down and they'll sell it of all their assets may
be you can get, if it gets low enough. So it's a big fear they don't want
investors to have a bad attitude. So then why would you as an investor
be disturbed if a company didn't pay a dividend? Well, I think it's a sort of
fundamental human miss trust. You don't know that these guys are on
the level, maybe they're crooks or maybe they're not. It's like missing a payment
on your credit card. You have a credit rating that
depends on you actually making these monthly payments. And you could take the attitude, well,
I'll miss it once and I'll pay the fine. What difference does it make? But your credit rating will
go down if you do that. So most people personally think,
I'm going to pay every month, this is something I'm really going to do. And they kind of imagine that it's
like that with dividends with company, if they miss a dividend it means they're
kind of unreliable, untrustworthy, now they didn't have to think that but that
apparently is how a lot of people think. So that's why lots of companies don't
ever want to miss paying a dividend. >> Couldn't missing a dividend also be
a real indication of financial trouble though and maybe that's why investors-
>> Right, right. >> Why a red flag is raised? >> Yeah, now the thing is that
a dividend is not promised. The corporate law says that they can pay a dividend at the discretion of
the board whether they want to or not. And many companies go years
without paying dividends, but the public might have some preconceived
notions and think it’s like my credit card bill and if their not paying,
there’s something wrong here. Now they could stop paying a dividend for
perfectly good reasons. Like they want to do something
with it that's more productive, but the investors might not understand. By the way, I don't mean that firms never
miss paying a dividend, I'm just saying that some firms pride themselves
on never having missed a dividend.