So I'm going to talk about five
levels of financial regulation. I'll call it regulation within a firm,
that's one. Number two is trade groups. These are organizations,
volunteer organizations of firms. Then there's local government regulation,
national government regulation, and finally international regulation. We've got all of these. So let's me start with
within-firm regulation. The board of directors is a uniform policy I think
practically everywhere in the world. So they typically have outside directors,
people from other walks of life who come in to represent the community, or
to just give them a sense of perspective. The board of directors
hires the president and fires the president if he or
she is not acting properly. The board of directors,
you can't make their burdens too heavy because you want people who are connected
to the world, and you value that. So you can't ask them to
make it a full-time job. So a board of directors is
usually a part-time job, and they're out there involved
in different things. So you put people in with reputations. I talked earlier about
personality disorders, like the anti-social personality disorder. People who are like that
are hard to diagnose, but you can diagnose them,
you could get an impression. We're all forming impressions
of people's personalities. When you're appointing directors,
you don't appoint people who have any shade of suspicion
of having a personality disorder. So that's part of what
makes directors work. It may not look fair who gets
put on the directors, but it's somebody that there's a relative
agreement, is not a criminal, is not a liar, and
has some sense of community spirit. So that's how it really
does work in most cases. Now, a problem with companies
is part of the thing we do, we put people on the corporation or
the board of directors who have such good reputations that they're not
going to compromise it, right? If someone says,
let's do some devious trick, this guy would say,
not on my watch, and resign. Because if you have a reputation,
it's precious. So that's partly what prevents
devious tricks from being played. Now, I want to talk about devious tricks. The word tunneling is often
used to describe tricks that people in companies use to
steal money from the company. I'm referring particularly to a nice
article by Johnson, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer in 2000. It's expropriation by minority
shareholders, or by board members, or by officers,
as if by an underground tunnel. Now they conclude in this paper that
tunneling is a real and big problem, and it's bigger in civil law countries
than in common law countries. Now what's the difference? Common law is what we have
in the United States, which means that we have
legislators making laws, but we also have courts making laws
in a different environment. Their laws are not public laws officially,
but they're legal precedent. So the courts,
when the Supreme Court declares something, it's like making a law. And civil law, as exemplified on much of continental Europe,
is entirely legislative. You have a Parliament or
a Congress that makes laws, and there's no consideration
of precedent by the courts. Common law has an advantage
in that the courts are making judgments in a specific case
where there's a dispute. So that makes them really close to the
problem and really close to human issues. When there's a dispute between two
sides in a legal case, you hear them on their two sides and you sense, there's
some emotion here, I can see the conflict. I'm going to try to find a nice way
to resolve it, and that becomes law. So I think that common law, I'll just say
that common law is better than civil law, because it has this aspect to it. And it's better able to deal with
tunneling, because tunneling comes up in specific cases where somebody has
stolen money from a company, and the shareholders are furious, and they
come to you and say, this was thievery. But usually it's subtle thievery. It's trickery, and
it becomes hard to disentangle. I think that the courts do better at
disentangling this kind of thing. So Johnson et al argue that tunneling is
more frequent in civil law countries. Common law is very useful in preventing
tunneling and other kinds of abuse. It's something that we don't often see. When you ask why is the UK so successful,
it's common law in business, or the US. It has something to do with this.