The second thing is overconfidence. Well, you can just do survey. Most people think they're above average. Most people think they're a better
driver than the average person. Most people think if they tried hard, they would be a better investor
than the average person. Most people think they understand
something that are not widely understood. Wishful thinking bias is actually
a term used in the psych literature that people overestimate the probability of the things that they identify with and
want to see happen. Very simple, you ask people what they think
the probability of their team winning is. And it's always higher if it's their
team or a political candidate. So this wishful thinking
bias also helps explain the immense volume of trade
in financial markets. There's so many shares traded
every day that it seems a puzzle. Why would people need to change
their holdings so often? Well it must be because
of wishful thinking bias. There's also a tendency for
overconfidence in friends and leaders. Well I say here the central bankers
tend to be, thought to be a genius. Throughout history, they're always
geniuses until they mess up maybe, but there's also overconfidence
in your own friends. You tend to think that your own friends
are really smarter than average, it's not just you. Anyone you identify with,
you tend to be overconfident in. So, there was a book by Rakesh Khurana,
at the Harvard Business School, that documents the way CEOs, Chief Executive Officers,
are chosen by corporations. Now companies will bring in
a CEO from another company, that was a success,
to transform their own company. And pass over someone in their own company
who knows the business really well, and has been there 30 years, and
might well be promoted up to CEO. But they'll take in someone from another
company that was a success there, without regard for the fact that it was probably mainly
luck that this person was a success. And they'll put him in in
place of their own guy, and then he feels that he has
to make some transformation. He's supposed to be a genius,
they're paying him $50 million. So he does some dramatic things and
totally destroys the company, because he doesn't know
what he's talking about. Also, Nassim Taleb in his
book Fooled by Randomness, which is another great book to read, describes how people in
business are overly influenced by the random successes of themselves or
others. People are over, now Irving Fisher
was a professor here at Yale. And he wrote a book, he was writing
a book in 1929 about how the stock market will continue to make us richer and
richer. But the crash interrupted his book, so
he had to change the title of the book. So he called it The Stock Market Crash and
After. But what he said is the stock market crash
of 1929 is a terrific buying opportunity. I was right all along,
the stock market will just keep going up, or at least stay at a quote,
permanently high plateau. He ultimately borrowed money
to try to stay in the market. He borrowed money from his relatives,
he lost everything. He lost his house,
he had no place to live. His house is right near
here on Prospect Street. It was, they tore it down, it's gone. Yale had to give him a place to live. But he never gave up, he kept saying that
the stock market will keep going up. Why do people do this? Well this is overconfidence,
and he's a great speaker. But he wasn't a great
stock market forecaster. Cognitive dissonance, this is a term
used by social psychologists. It refers to the mental conflict
that occurs when one's beliefs are discovered to be wrong. So I'll give you a famous experiment
that revealed cognitive dissidence. The experimenters went to get a list from car dealers of people who
had just bought a new car. They knew that the person had bought a new
car and they knew what model it was. They then didn't tell the subjects
how they had found them, and they asked them,
what magazines do you read?. And when they named the magazine,
they would pull out a copy, they had all the new magazines there and
say, lets go through the magazine. And you tell me which ads
you read in the magazine and also whether you thought about them and
read them carefully. So, what do you think people did? Did they read ads for
the car they just bought? Yes, they did that strongly. They read and reread and congratulated
themself about how great a car it was. Do you think they read the ads of a car
that they, a different make of car, that they were thinking of buying but
did not buy? As you expect, no,
they don't read those ads. So why are they doing,
isn't this irrational behavior? You've already bought the car,
why bother to read any ads? But on the other hand, why would
you selectively ignore the ads for the other cars? You're just trying to make
yourself feel good, right? And so, it's irrational behavior. Once you've made a decision, you kind of
identify with that decision and it's me. Now I want to hear more
about why I was right. I don't want to hear
that I might be wrong. It's a personal thing, this isn't really talking about
being embarrassed by a bad decision. It's just perfectly internal to you
that you just get a bad feeling when you made a mistake. So the disposition effect might also
be partially explained by that. If you bought a stock and
its price goes down, you're feeling that maybe you were wrong
and that gives you a cognitive dissidence. So you just avoid it, I'm not going to
think about that stock, I didn't buy that, I'm not here. And then, until it goes up,
if it goes back up, then you might sell it as
soon as it comes back. So Will Goetzmann here at Yale with Nadav
Peles looked at mutual fund investors. These tend to be small
retail investors and they found evidence for cognitive dissonance,
basically the disposition effect. But they also found that when
they talked to investors, they didn't even remember the performance
of funds that had declined. So there's a tendency of human thought
because of cognitive dissonance, just to blank out your bad memories
of times when you were wrong, and don't even know that they happen. We live in an economy
that incentivizes people to capitalize on your
psychological quirks. And they strongly incentivize
people to do that. That's what the profit
motive is all about. >> So, do you think that we're not
rational with these quirks, or would you agree that
most people are rational? >> Well, yeah, we're not rational. I'm not rational, I don't know about you. We're not rational in the sense
that we have some consistent logical way of deciding things. We all make little mistakes and
we learn, by the way, we hear from others about when they
were really taken advantage of so we avoid some things, some gimmicks. And we have laws against them. The government regulates lotteries,
you can't start a lottery. You can't do it at all, or maybe you could
do it as part of a state government. And that's because they know that
there are lots of giveaway contests, but they don't charge,
because it's illegal to charge for them. They can just use them as publicity. So we have a legal system that protects us
against our own psychological failings.