Now, the basic corporate
charter emphasizes that all common shareholders
are treated equally. They don't have to pay out dividends to
them, but if they do pay out dividends, it has to be every share gets the same. And that's where the word equity comes in,
it's equality of shareholders. Does not have to pay dividends,
it doesn't ever have to pay dividends. But you trust that the Board will
pay dividends, because the other shareholders want the money, they can't
get at it without paying you too. The firm can also repurchase shares
instead of paying a dividend. No law saying that they have to,
they can both issue new shares and they can repurchase shares,
the Board decides. There's also other kinds
of corporate liability, warrants which are a form of option,
convertible debt. They can do whatever they want, but the fundamental thing that
ties it down is that all shareholders have one vote,
and they elect the Board. Now there are critics of
shareholder democracy. Notice notably Berle and Means wrote
a book in 1933, that was very influential. Arguing that while you've
described a system of corporate governance
that sounds plausible, and probably does work for little companies,
but it might not work for big companies. Well I know when I set up my own
little company, Case Shiller Weiss, there were three of us, and
well we had one more major shareholder. We got together, and
it was very clear that we voted and things happened because we were involved. So the democracy, it just seemed
perfectly natural and functional. But Berle and Means thought that it
doesn't work so well for big companies. The same reason may be why voting, when there are millions of people voting,
doesn’t work so well. So I know what you think whether,
do you vote? Okay, as you go to the voting booth in an
election, does it ever occur to you that my vote doesn't matter unless the rest
of the people are equally tied, right? If exactly half vote for one candidate and
exactly half vote for the other candidate that it's tied and my vote would decide,
otherwise my vote doesn't do anything. So what's the probability that
my vote is the deciding vote? Well if there's millions of people,
the probability must be miniscule, so if you were really rational,
you wouldn't vote. But people still vote in elections, and
this must be out of some sort of patriotic feeling or a sense of obligation. But when it comes to corporations,
those senses aren't so, you don't feel patriotic for
a corporation. So and a corporation has an election,
why do I even bother. We're holding diversified portfolios,
aren't we? So, I've got a hundred different stocks, I can't keep up with how
they're all being managed. [INAUDIBLE] during election and
vote my share. I'm only a tiny, tiny fraction,
so why should I do that? So Berle and Means said that, while in practice we have
shareholder democracy, in practice the democracy is imperfect. It's really self-perpetuating
Boards of Directors. So their book was extremely
important historically. And what it led to is new regulation that
tried to allow for takeovers of companies. What Berle and Means said, is there's
a lot of companies were ill managed and managed for the interest of the board
of directors because they just owned, effectively owned, they can't pay
themselves big amounts of money. They can pay fairly generous salaries,
they can hire their friends and give them nice jobs as sort of
ripping off the company. The shareholders, some of them might
hear about this and get upset but it's hopeless. You can't influence the votes of so
many people. So they made it easier, 1935
the Securities and Exchange Commission under authority of the act that
had just created it in 1934, established rules for proxy contests. So that people who wanted to change
the governance of the company could reach the shareholders and ask them to sign
a contract to let you vote on my behalf. You would give them
the right to be a proxy for you at the shareholder's meeting. And they made it,
companies didn't want to help outsiders reach their shareholders, they
wouldn't publish the list of shareholders. So there was no way that if proxy contest
could have been done prior to 1935. But now they made it because
they began to think, we have to make sure
holding democracy works. This is the Roosevelt era,
which was very left wing. But the really wonderful
thing about the Roosevelt new deal was that it wasn't socialist. It was maybe motivated by social
harmony and concern about poor people. But it left intact the corporation. So this doesn't sound like
Franklin Delano Roosevelt at all. But it is, it's trying to make Democracy work and
they wanted shareholder democracy to work. So there have to be election contests in
corporations like we see in politics. In 1956,
amendments made proxy contests difficult. But then people later as we move
to a more free market governance, relaxed the 1956 amendment so
that proxy contests came back. Now some companies have classes of shares,
as permitted by state law. So you can have both voting and
non-voting shares. Berkshire Hathaway, which is
the company of Warren Buffett, who has both class A shares that have voting
rights, and class B shares do not. I have to update this. What the Class A shares self or not,
it was recently $200,000 a share. That doesn't mean, this is a big company. It only means they don't split. And it would be $30 a share if they
split like other companies, and it wouldn't make the company any less
valuable, maybe I'm over stressing that. The New York Times has both
Class A shares and Class B. Class A has less voting
rights than Class B. Which allows the descendent of
the original Adolph Ochs family still to control the company. Why do they do that? Well, they think that the New York Times
serves a higher purpose. That is, it's not out for profits, it has some profits but not entirely. So they gave the original
New York Times family more voting rights than
the other shareholders. This has been under criticism recently but
still is maintained. Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg recently, I don't know what the percent is right
now, but had 28% of its shares, but 57% of its voting shares, which
basically Mark does whatever he wants. If he has the majority of votes in the,
but that's because of the classes of shares.