So the idea is, I said this before, finance is a technology,
it can be used for good or evil. It has a tendency for a successful practitioners to
start attracting a lot of money. That doesn't mean that you can't be
a moral and ethical person in finance. So one thing I note in giving
talks around the world that when you go to poor countries and
give a talk, they are intrinsically interested in
finance because people today recognize that financial markets
are part of economic success. They understand that in China,
they understand that in Russia, they understand that in Brazil and
many more countries. Because finance is a real technology. They're not so interested in getting
foreign aid, they don't need foreign aid, they just need the right principles and
the wealth appear on it's own. So this is not a course about how you
can lead a rich and self indulgent life. It's a course that involves
some moral purpose. Andrew Carnegie was one of
the richest men in America. He said that he thinks that rich people,
people who succeed in business. He doesn't use the word business. People who succeed in affairs. Now that sounds different today, but
affairs meant business back then. People who succeed are people
with a natural, practical talent. And the business world selects for
people with this natural talent. And so when they make a lot of money it
is their obligation to give it away for the benefit of society and not to their
useless children or spoiled children. Moreover, Andrew Carnegie said,
you can hear him say this, he said that you should give it away
while you are still young because you've amassed all this wealth,
what's going to happen to it? It's absurd the story that happens. Young people make a lot of money when
their talents are at their strongest. Then they get old and
they don't know what to do anymore. They work until they die or
they become self indulgent. And it ends up with their children. And then it ruins the children's life
because now they have no purpose and they're just filthy rich. And they just squander it. So like Vanderbilt and his grandson, William Henry Vanderbilt,
made huge amounts of money. And then his son married a socialite,
the famous Mrs. Vanderbilt, who spent all the money in showing off
her wealth and having big parties. Maybe that was good in some sense,
but you don't want that to happen. So what Carnegie said is
you have to retire early. And become a philanthropists that's
the second stage of your life. So I want to come back to this
thing that if you go into finance think of you life as having two states. Like Bill Gates, Bill Gates was
running Microsoft then he retired and set up the Gates foundation and
he's actively working on giving it away. So this is not a course,
again, repeat, not a course. It's a course on how you can
make your mark on society, but it's not a course on how to get rich.