So, now, how do companies raise money? You're in a company and
you're trying to make a profit. You need money, say to build a new
factory, or to launch a new ad campaign. So, you need the money now and
you get profits later. How do you get the money? Well, there's two major resources,
ways to do it. Well, I should, maybe three. One of them is retained earnings. I'll list that first. You can wait until you've made
enough money, you save it up, and then you can build your new factory. That's one way. But it's slow because you have to wait
until you've got the retained earning to do that. Often, young companies don't
have much earnings because they're putting everything
into the future. Another thing you can do is borrow money,
either through banks. You can go to a bank and
say I'd like a loan for my company. Or you can issue debt and
sell that through a broker. You will issue a corporate bond,
which brings in money. And you can issue shares, new shares. So suppose there are a million
shares outstanding. You can issue another million shares. Now, the shareholders of the company,
when you do that, are going to look at that and
say wait a minute. What are we doing here? I used to own 10% of the company,
and now I own only 5%, so I'm not so sure I'm happy about that. But then you on the board would say, but
don't worry, we brought in millions of dollars for, and you own a share of
that so the company has more now. So it's not bad for you, we need
the money because we need to invest. And I think people understand that. So this is called dilution. When they issue more shares,
your share in the company goes down, defined as the total of shares
you have divided by total shares. And so, do you feel happy, or not? Well, you have to understand
that it's diluted you. You no longer have the same
vote that you used to have. You've given up some voting power in
order to get money to expand the company. You might come to a shareholder or
a shareholders' meeting and complain. But they'll say, but
look this is the way it works. We can't expand without money. And this will make you, you'll' be treated equally to these other
guys that came in and bought new shares. So you might as well back down. I guess that's the way,
all these big companies did that. So that if you're an initial
shareholder you once owned a big fraction of the company. It keeps going down but
the company keeps going up in value. But here's why they call it equity,
because all common shareholders are equal. Now, so
what about issuing shares to get money? Well, some people said that issuing
shares isn't very important anymore. That companies, when they need money, they borrow money or
they use retained earnings. Karl Marx thought that. He said all this trade in stocks
is trading mostly existing shares. It doesn't bring money into the company. All this transaction, it's just gambling,
that's what Marx said. All these people playing a game. It's only when the company issues shares
that share price matters economically. And Marx thought they
don't do that very much. Stewart Myers, who's a professor of
finance at MIT, wrote an article in 1984, arguing that well, I don't think he
put it this way, Marx was right. I'm sure he didn't say Marx was right,
but he was effectively saying that. because he looked at the data and he said,
firms don't issue, when they first start, they issue a lot of shares. But after that,
they're not issuing very much. So he said, proposed what he called the
Pecking Order Theory of corporate finance. How do a corporation,
this sounds like behavioral economist, now he might shudder if I identify
him as a behavioral economist, but this is what this sounds like to me. The best way to raise money for
corporate actions, according to what he said boards think,
is retained earnings. You feel most comfortable. You go to a board meeting and say we
need to build a new factory and, but, we've been making a lot of money, and
we've got all this cash lying around. We'll use the retained earnings
to build a new company. That feels really good
going into the board. They'll say, well, why not? They'll go for that. But then if you say let's go
to the bank and borrow money, then they get a little nervous
because bankers sometimes ask for the money back and
then you can be in trouble. So they're not quite so willing, so
that's lower on the pecking order. But then the other thing you can say,
all right, let's issue a new share. Now, they get really creepy. Now, they're thinking,
are my votes going down? I don't like, it's so
often shareholders are on the board. They're thinking, now, I"m going to
be giving up power to other people, and if our profits don't go up, then we're going to be dividing
them up among more people. So they don't like that. So Stewart Myers' article was very
influential because it sounded right. This sounds like the way I can imagine
myself behaving as a board member and he showed statistics emphasizing that. Now as of 1984, most firms had not done a single equity offering
in the last 20 years. And when asked,
are you thinking of issuing new shares, did not even contemplate doing it. From the years 1973 to 1982, 62% of capital expenditures
came from retained earning. That is what companies
were doing at that time. And only 6% from issuance of new shares. So if they never issue new shares, then what difference does the share price
mean anyway to corporate activities? So this was a Marx was right conclusion. But they were criticized,
notably Eugene Fama and Ken French. This is the Eugene Fama that we keep
talking about, the efficient markets guy, but I think they were right here. Stewart Myers choice of
1973 to '82 was atypical. The stock market crashed in 1973,
and it was still low, so you didn't get much money for
the new shares you issued. Of course,
nobody issued new shares, and, but even so, there was some forms of
equity issuance even in that period. For example, they issued corporate
shares to employees as compensation, or they had Warrants on the stock
that were given to employees. So there was some issuance, even then, but the amount of equity issuance
increased right after. They gave, 86% of firms issued some equity between 1993 and 2002. So it's really not true. Marx wasn't really right
about the price of a share in the public market matters for the
amount of money that a company can raise. So if the market price goes up, the company can get more
money by issuing shares. And that encourages them to do that and
make more investments. When the stock market goes down,
the company starts looking at it. Typically, the board members are still
optimistic about the company. And you say let's,
we're down to $3 a share. You might be talking about doing
a reverse split to try to bring it up. But you're thinking,
are we selling these shares for only $3? I had my life's dreams. We're going to diluted down for just $3? I don't believe that and wouldn't do that.