So again,
when someone buys a futures contract, one agrees with the exchange through
a daily settlement procedure. Now on the floor of the exchange, they traditionally used hand signals
because, and this goes back to Dojima. This shows that Dojima
is really the source of the whole idea of futures trading. So you get all these people
together today in a so-called pit, where traders talk to each other. But there's so much noise that you can't
hear someone standing right next to you, they're all shouting. So they developed a sign language. So you if wanted to buy futures, you'd
put up a hand like this, meaning buy. And then you'd had ways of
signaling your number, the price. And if you sell, I guess you have your
hand out, meaning I want to sell. The Dojima contract also
had some funny features. They wanted to impose a trading hours
in Japan, back then, a long time ago. And so they didn't have clocks. So you couldn't put up a nice
clock on the wall in those times. So they had a burning fuse. And just before the closing of trading,
they would light the fuse and everyone would see the fire. And when the fire went out, that was
a warning, like a five minute warning, the market will be closed as of that time. And they wanted to stop trading
after the market closed. So they had what were called water men,
who came with buckets of water. And they walked around the trading floor,
and they looked for someone who was still trading. And they splashed them with
water [LAUGH] to stop trading. We don't do that anymore. In fact, now it's all largely electronic. There still are.
You can still go to the CME in Chicago and see people on the floor trading
with their hand signals. But the last time I heard,
I was there on the floor a few years ago. It looked awfully quiet. It's dying down because so
much more is electronic. So as I mentioned before,
there's Daily Settlement. Every day until expiration, a margin
account is credited or debited with an amount equal to the change in the
settle price times the contract amount. By the way, the settle price, you might think of that as
the last trade of yesterday. But the problem is that they're worried
about people trying to manipulate the last trade of yesterday. Because it could be a small trade, and then there would be big
settlements based on the trade. So, in order to protect that,
they have a settlement committee that looks at the final trades and
asks whether they're representative. And they might choose a settle price, which is not the same as
the closing price, the last price. All right, but
the only difference is the last day. So if it's a physical delivery futures
market, the last day is different. If you haven't closed out by the last day,
if you're a seller, you'd better be there with
your trucks of grains. And if you're a buyer, you'd better be
there with empty trucks to load it in. Everyone else is closed
out before the last day. The only people who do
that are arbitrators. So a farmer in Iowa who's
planting a crop expected to yield 50,000 bushels is essentially
long 50,000 bushels. And so sells, let's say,
ten Chicago September corn contracts for the price on that date and post margin. A corn produced products manufactured
plants to buy corn at that time and buys the ten contracts. But again, they never talk to
each other or meet each other or worry about each other, because they're
both doing this with the exchange. So they locked in the price for
both of them. >> I'm really curious about the role
of arbitrage in the futures markets. Someone could, for example,
take possession of rice or iron ore, but then if the price is too low,
sell it at the spot price. However, if the underlying commodities
actually index rather than a tangibly traded future,
what is the role for arbitrage in creating some
of that layer of efficiency? >> Okay, good question. So let me get back to the core
idea of a futures market. Let's start with, as you described,
physical delivery. So let's talk about a corn futures market. We have that at the Chicago Mercantile,
CME Group. 1 contact is 5,000 bushels. You can buy corn for a year in the future. What does it mean to buy
corn a year in the future? What it means is, I put up margin today. So 5,000 bushels might cost something
like $50,000, depending on the price. So if I agree to buy 5,000
in 1 year at $10 a bushel, do I have to put up $50,000 today? No, you only have to put up margin today. And then your margin
account is credited or depleted as the price changes. And at the final,
there's a final settlement at the end where you either
have to deliver the corn and take the, at the then futures price. And what tends to bring the futures price in line with corn price in the future is,
as you say, the fact that if the futures price
differed a lot from the price of corn. If the futures price were,
let's say, below the spot price of corn on that date, then people
would be buying the futures and bringing the corn for
delivery and selling it. Which they tend to make the two convert. That's what you understand already. [LAUGH] But the other side is,
what if the contract is cash settled? Then you have the same daily resettlement. So if I buy S&P 500 Index futures for
delivery in one year, what it means is that the price today,
if it never changed, would lead me to a settlement at the end. Well, there's two S&P Index futures. There's one, the regular conventional one,
which is $250 times the index. And there's the E-mini,
which is $50 times the index. Now there's nothing you can deliver. You can't deliver the S&P 500 Index. It's just a number. But it's the same thing, that you have
to put up margin at the beginning. And then the daily resettlement, based on changes in the futures market,
will raise or lower your margin account. But when you come to the end,
there's a final settlement. Now this is maybe what is a little
bit tricky to understand. The final settlement does not involve you
coming with 5,000 bushels of corn and arriving at the facility
that receives corn. Or 5 empty trucks to receive
5,000 bushels of corn. There's no such thing. But on the last day, there's a final
settlement, which is the difference between the last futures price and
the actual index. It represents the profit or loss you would've made if you
actually delivered the index. So that means that if the future's
price is below the S&P 500 Index on the day before the final settlement,
you can be an arbitrator just the same. All you have to do is buy a contract, and that's all you need to do because it'll
automatically settle at the end as the difference between the index and
the futures price. So, it's even easier to arbitrage
the financial futures contract. So it happens quite reliably. That is, what's quite reliable is,
on the last day, when the delivery day,
that corn price future is going to be exactly the same as
the price of, well, a bushel of corn. And the S&P 500 Index
future is going to be, within a tiny margin of error,
the same as the S&P 500 Index. So it's a clever system. I hope that I made that clear. But cash settlement opens up the
possibility of doing many more kinds of. I was mentioning my home price future,
that's a cash-settled contract. We can't deliver homes. That would be kind of tough. [LAUGH] How would you deliver a home? And also, homes are not standardized. They're all different. When you have a physical delivery
as a settlement procedure, it has to be possible to define
precisely what it is that's delivered. But homes are so variable, and
some of them are beat up and run down. And some of them are beset by crime, and
some of them are wonderful neighborhoods. It's all so intangible. So you need cash settled futures. It's kind of remarkable that
cash settled futures didn't really occur until a few decades ago,
because it's a great idea. It's one of those inventions in
finance that I like to talk about.