Now, culture, I talked about earlier,
and social contagion. But there's so much to say about this, but
culture is our society's values and norms. Social cognition is our
thinking in generally, and Émile Durkheim in 1897 was
a pioneer in sociology. So, we have a collect, well, actually the word collective
memory was used by Durkheim. We remember the same thing, we talk,
we all have the same facts and statistics in our minds, so
we reach similar decisions. There's social contagion,
and there's a tendency for us to adopt beliefs of other people. There's a mathematical theory of
disease epidemics that can be applied to speculative behavior. So, I've assigned for
this lecture of the course some pages from the book
Irrational Exuberance that I wrote. We talked about moral anchors for
the market in the form of stories. There's a whole branch of psychology
called narrative psychology which reminds people that the human mind is influenced
fundamentally by stories about people. That we derive motivation
from these stories. Robert Abelson at Yale was
involved with that too. We have identity, a sense of identity, an ego involvement with stories
that we think relate to our life. We have a story of our life, and this
story can be tied in with other events that help promote one's sense of ego. And finally, my last of my categories
is antisocial personality disorder. This is a disorder which has been
recognized by psychiatrists, it has been called sociopath, or
sociopathy, or sociopaths, or psychopaths. And so the American Psychological
Association publishes a diagnostic and statistical manual. From their fifth edition, we define
this disorder in the following terms. Identity, egocentric,
self-esteem from personal gain, self-direction, absence of
prosocial internal standards, lack of empathy, incapacity for
intimacy, manipulative, deceitful, callous, hostile, irresponsible,
impulsive, risk-taking. Boy, those are a lot of insults. But what they're referring
to in the DSM5 is that this is a pattern, that there
are people who show all of this things. There's something in their
brain that is different, and so certain emotions which we take for
granted are not there. Now, in DSM5 as opposed to DSM4, it used
to be all or nothing [COUGH] diagnoses, now they want to acknowledge gradations,
or levels of. It's not all or nothing, we might
all be antisocial at some time, but not at others. There's also, this is different from
borderline personality disorder, which is more common among women than men. And about 3% of men are antisocial
personality disorder, at least according to the fourth edition,
and only 1% of women. But women, it's reversed with
borderline personality disorder. So, instability of relationships, extremes of overidealization,
and then devaluations. They swing from thinking this is
a perfect friend to not perfect. Depressed moods lasting hours to days,
inappropriate intense anger, frantic efforts to avoid real or
imagined abandonment. But I want to talk about
antisocial personality disorder. The movie The Big Short suggests that
some people in the finance [LAUGH] profession have antisocial
personality disorder, is that true? Well, there's a literature on this, I think the answer is no,
those guys are in jail. That the profession like,
the finance profession, like other professions is pretty
successful in discovering these disorders, but on the other hand,
there might be an attraction. If you read the list of symptoms of
antisocial personality disorder, it does fit, but
I think that it's not true. That, like in any other profession,
we are successful, and you can't hide these things for
too long, and you'll end up caught. It's unfortunate we have
to deal with these, it's 3% of our male population has this
disorder, we have to live with it. Anyway, I'm just going to conclude
with these psychological principles that I talked about are involved in many
things that happen in the financial world.