There have been in history many banking
crisis where banks are subjected to a run. Depositors lose faith in the bank,
and the bank runs out of money. During a bank run,
everybody goes to the bank and demands their money at the same time. And banks can't handle this. So government regulators long ago
impose in the United States and in other countries reserve requirements
that banks have to keep a certain amount of cash on reserve to meet any sudden
increase in demand from their depositors. And so the government then put
a requirement that was binding, banks would hold some reserves anyway
because they recognize the risk. But the government in the United States
put reserve requirements high enough that banks were forced to
hold more than they wanted. Excess reserves are the reserves
that banks hold beyond what they're required
to hold by regulation. And it's an interesting chart. They never did hold any excess,
well actually you can't see it. >> Right, there's a small blip. >> There's a little blip, yeah. But basically when you make a regulation,
it's either binding or it's not. If it's binding, that means they
don't want to hold that much. Why don't they want to
hold excess reserves? Well because they didn't pay any interest. And so banks like to lend out the money so
they didn't want to. But then, suddenly,
they started holding excess reserves. And why is that? Very simple explanation. You see this gray shaded area,
that represents the recession. In fact, this is the Great Recession. These are relatively minor recessions. This is the big one. And it was so bad that in many
countries all over the world, Central Banks cut interest
rates as far as they could, and that was zero in order to
stimulate the economy. So the problem is, now, banks don't care. They can only invest at zero. >> It's like putting it
under your mattress. >> Yeah, the banks have no
place to go with this money. So they think,
why we won't just leave it in reserves?. We don't care, so we're holding much more
reserve than the Central Bank requires. And you can really see it. They were holding,
this is in the millions of dollars. So this is a huge, [LAUGH] a huge
amount of money held in reserved. And it has just kept going up. It's really remarkable that there's so much cash just lying around now and
not being lent out. And interest rates are, well,
they've come up a little bit. This chart ends but they're so
close to zero anyway that banks don't see lending
opportunities that appeal to them. Also, regulation has made it harder for
them to make risky loans. So, this is the source of our concerns
about what's called secular stagnation. That there's something different about
now, compared to any other time, going back decades, what's different is,
there's just no place to invest. You wouldn't leave money lying around,
earning zero interest. These are professional
finance people running banks. They're letting it just lie there,
earning nothing. So it's a sign of some kind of fundamental
weakness in the world economy, that came on with the financial crisis. Moral hazard and
adverse selection are fundamental issues. Let's put it the context of
fire insurance, all right. If you open up a company that insures home
against burning down, you run two risks. One of them is moral hazard. That's the risk that one of your,
you sold the policy to someone who owns a house to insure
that house against fire. Then, the person deliberately burns
the house down in order to collect. That's a real problem, although you might
be able to prove that it was arson but maybe not. Maybe the guy can make it look real,
normal. So the protection against
that kind of moral hazard is, don't insure the full value of the house. Make it always in the interest
of the home buyer to sell the house rather
than burn it down. The other thing is adverse selection. If you're doing fire insurance,
even if people are moral and ethical, and they won't play tricks on you,
it could be that people might know that their house is not fire proof, that
their house is in danger of burning down. So all the people will flock to you who have homes that are in
danger of burning down. And so, you will get a selected part
of the potential insurance market. It's always the worst for you,
so what do you do about that? You have to carefully examine
the kinds of property and you'll get a fire expert to look and see whether
this house is different from others. And you have to then maybe add a little
bit more to the premium than you would normally charge because you're
worried about adverse selection. Now how can I relate it to this? >> [LAUGH]
>> Now some people will say when I look at this, that all this money is sitting in the bank's reserves not
earning any interest. But then I say, I look around, I can see
interest rates that are higher than that. That are higher than zero,
well above zero. Like for example, so called junk bonds. They might pay an interest of 10%,
even now. So what's going on here? Well, this could be
considered adverse selection. If you go up to the, at this time in history when
interest rates are practically zero. And you go out and say, no, I'm going to
invest in high interest rate loans. You might be suffering
an adverse selection problem. You might be suffering the problem that
some of these borrowers are going to burn their house down or they're very
subject to fires or disasters. And so you will always see what
look like investment opportunities, but for professional bankers,
they're not opportunities. You can as a bank, you can advertise, we're making loans at
a good interest rate. Who's going to come to you? If business is bad, it's going to
be these, I hate to say it, losers. [LAUGH] People who are not good prospects. So the banks then, because of fear of
adverse selection having gotten worse, when nobody else is lending, you think, am I going to be the guy who
goes out there and makes these loans? Not now, I'm going to wait too. >> And so in both of these
cases there's kind of either an asymmetry of information or
the inability to monitor. Let's say the homeowner
when you're insuring them. So in the same lecture you'd also
mentioned a very key point that the institution of banking is, in some
ways, helps to mitigate these frictions. So I was wondering if you could
kind of talk about that a little? >> Any business in insurance or
banking or finance more generally, has to worry about adverse selection,
moral hazard, and they have to worry about their
being manipulated or deceived. So what you need is a business
that invest in information. And invest in trusting relationships, so a well-run bank will have
local offices in every city. The local banker then gets
involved with people in that city. He or she plays golf with them,
hears the gossip, gets to know important people
in that regional economy. And then when someone comes for a loan
you can call up your friend and say, what do you think of this guy? And then you develop a relationship
with the borrower as well. You have coffee with him, you say
hi when you meet him on the street. >> Right. >> And
you can judge the expression on his face. [LAUGH] Whether he's doing well or not. And bankers then use
their gut intuition and their information to decide whether to
make loans, or whether to take risks. >> Okay.