What does the stock market value? Now as I said last time, a lot of
people think the stock market, you buy into the stock market so that it goes
up and you can sell at a higher price. But was is it? What are you pricing? Well, some people have
never thought about that, they just want to know whether it goes up. So what I was saying last period,
I'll repeat it, that most of the return people
have gotten historically from stocks is in dividends,
not in capital gains. And in fact,
it's correct to think that efficient markets implies that what
you're really pricing in the stock market is
a claim on dividend. Suppose a company were to say we
will never pay a dividend again. Now we're going to put it into our charter
that we will never pay a dividend. All of our profits go to charity,
let's say. Well, you can do that, but
what's the value of a share? There are no shares, if there were,
they'd be meaningless, so they'd be worth nothing. So it's all about dividends,
there's two important ratios. There's the price earnings ratio, price
per share divided by earnings per share. And there's the price dividend ratio,
typically dividend price ratio, where it's dividends per share
divided by price per share. Now let's simplify things and
not worry about that distinction. Suppose a company is paying out
all of it's earning as dividends, then the two are the same. So let's just talk about
the price earnings ratio. What does that mean? It's different for different companies,
some have a high price earnings ratio. It could be as high as 100,
that's very unusual. Which would mean that you'd have to wait
100 years to get your money back based on dividends, if you bought it. That's a long time to wait, more typically the price earnings
ratio is something like 15. So you'd buy a share and
in 15 years, if you're getting all the earnings as dividends,
you'd have your money back. So the price earnings ratio should be
something like that, like 15 right? 10, 15, 20, not 100, you wouldn't buy into an investment
that takes 100 years to pay out. So what determines
the price earnings ratio? Well, I refer to the idea that efficient
markets idea is that the price of a share is the present discounted value
of its expected future dividends. And then I can apply the Gordon Rule,
which I mentioned recently, which says the price should be equal
to earnings divided by r minus g. Where r is the interest rate or
discount rate, and g is the growth rate of earnings, so the
price earnings ratio is 1 over r minus g. Now this is a very important model,
because it gives you a theory it's an efficient markets theory,
why some firms have high price earnings ratio and others
firms have low price earnings ratio. It always has to do with r and g, those are the only thing
that goes into this formula. So if a company has a low
price earnings ratio, according to efficient markets,
according to this, I should say efficient markets
is not precisely defined. There are many different
efficient markets models, but I'm taking this sort of basic
canonical present value model of efficient markets. And it would say if a company has low PE, that means either r is high for
that company, or g is low for that company,
or a combination of both. Now why would r be high for a company? Well if you believe the standard
theory which has been taught for 50 years in finance courses, we have
the security markets line remember? The expected return on a stock is a function of it's
covariance with the market. So that would mean that companies
whose return covaries with the market should tend to have via this r thing,
should have low price earnings ratios. In simple terms, they're riskier
in the correct sense that provide. They're riskier in that they
co-vary with the market. The other thing though is g. Some companies have very
high growth prospects. That everyone knows, they have some
patent say, or some good technology. Nobody can compete with them,
they're just starting out. Of course you expect
their earnings to grow. But in efficient markets,
that's not a reason to invest in them. Because the price will reflect
the growth in earnings already, so it will already be discounted
into the present value. So anyway, high growth companies should tend to have high PE,
a low PE would be a low growth company. There are often good reasons for
a low price earnings ratio. One is that the business is very risky and
so people don't want to put
a lot of money into it. And another one is that the business might
have a poor earnings growth outlook. That earnings is likely to fall,
the classic example of that is rail roads. That was the in thing in the 19th century, by the early 20th century it was
looking a little bit old fashion. And we've gone another 100 years, so they're really not the most
rapidly growing investment. So they get beaten down,
the price gets beaten down. But you know what? Railroads are here to stay, and there's always a price that
makes them a good investment. So when were railroads a good investment? Well, I was thinking around 2000,
when the market was at a peak. Well I call them Millennium Peak. And it was all this
Internet dot com stuff. You shouldn't have been
buying dot com then, usually. You should have been buying
railroads because they were just forgotten at the time. The question is, does it work? Does the efficient markets model work? Well, I've been always saying that
efficient markets is a half-truth, and it sort of half works. Especially with as I say,
railroads are not high PE stocks. But there's another
approach to investing which goes back many years called
value investing, okay. Notably Benjamin Graham and David Dodd who were teaching
finance at Columbia University in the 1930s they wrote a textbook
called Securities Analysis. And in that textbook they outlined
their thought that PE varies for other reasons than just this technical
reason that we talked about, because companies go in and
out of fashion. And when they're hot,
people bid them up too high. And then when they're ignored, they just
ignore them and forget about them, and they get low PEs. So value investing, as outlined in 1934
by Graham and Dodd, is still with us. And it still works, although it
hasn't worked in the last five years. It comes and goes., but
generally it has worked. This is going to apply also to real
estate, but let me just move on to. This is a figure from the third
edition irrational exuberance that you have and
it gave some sense of value investing. The thin black line is the stock price, it is the S&P 500 index corrected for
inflation back to 1996. And the solid black
line is a tabulation of a questionnaire item I've
been doing since 1996. So I started doing surveys,. Actually, I started in the 1980s
doing surveys of investors. These are individual investors,
high income. I mean, income $200,000. I figure those are more
representative of the stock market. I like low income people, but I don't survey them when
asking about the stock market. So the question was do you agree
with the following statement? Stocks are the best investment for
long-term holders who can buy and hold through the ups and
downs of the market. I'd heard that phrase said so
many times in 1996 that I thought, I better start tabulating. Do people believe that? Now, this theory is not
what we say in this course. This course emphasizes diversification and not looking for the best investment, but
I just want to know what people think. To my amazement,
almost everybody thought that's right, stocks are the best investment. So you can see, in the year 2000
which I have marked up here, the something like 95% of these people
thought stocks were the best investment. Now there could be a little of a bias. These are people who agreed
to fill out my questionnaire. They must have found it interesting,
so it may not be completely accurate. But it's certainly
an awfully high proportion. I almost don't believe results like this. It was really into the culture that
smart people invest in the stock market. But you notice the stock market had
been rising for years prior to that. And this is the peak of what I call
in the book, the Millennium Bubble, this is the new millennium. And then we celebrated the new millennium. It was great, do you remember it? Probably not very well. And look what the stock
market did right after it. And then look what happened
to opinions about stocks are the best investment right after it. It came down with it. The stock market bottomed out. So did their agreement with that. Now it's not a perfect fit,
but I see a strong parallel. This inclines me to value investing. This question didn't ask about, do you think the stock market will go
up next year or the next two years. It's about stocks are the best investment. It's like timeless. So why should opinions about something so
timeless be so variable through time? And why are they so influenced by
the recent behavior of the market? But I think that's human psychology and
behavioral economics.