Now there's another kind of futures contract which is a financial future developed much later. And so one example of that is the S&P 500 stock price futures. And that's cash settled rather than physical delivery and the settlement is at the last day is equal to $250 times the index on the last day minus the futures price, the day before. So the fair value for this, it looks similar to the fair value for commodities. The fair value which is what the price should be is equal to the price- I could say times 1 plus R minus Y. Where Y is the dividend real. But that's the same formula. If you make y equal to minus a negative storage costs. The storage costs for stocks is negative because they pay a dividend and if you are storing stocks you get the dividend. So it's the same fair value formula except that we minus y equals s. The federal funds futures market is another example of a financial futures market but it's a market and the federal funds rate. Which is the interest rate charged by banks on loans to each other. And it's also the overnight interest rate that the Fed targets in its monetary policy. It was created by the Chicago Board of Trade in 1988 and of course its cash selling. You can't physically deliver the federal funds rate. The settlement price is 100 minus the annualized federal funds rate averaged over the contract month. It's used widely to show expectations of actions of the Federal Open Market Committee. So I don't have a fair value for the federal funds futures market because it's not storable but it's an overnight contract if just predicting. But it's often used to tell you what the expectations are for interest rates in the future. So you'll basically understand that the price represents 100 minus the annualized federal funds rate. I'm interested in the federal funds rate futures market. How accurate is it in predicting the Fed's behavior and what economic value does it add? Well the federal funds rate is the policy or tool of the target, of the Federal Reserve System. They announced targets for the federal funds rate in their regular statements of the Federal Open Market Committee. So the federal funds futures market is watched a lot. Often the people are paying attention to the near-term market. So they're trying to predict the Federal Funds Rate just months into the future. There's a lot of thought that goes into this. So this is a futures market that I think would be filled with a lot of intelligent speculators who want to really hit the target. And as such I think it is a successful market that the price reflecting expectations of future federal funds rate is widely accepted as a barometer of the likely outcome of the next FOMC meeting. I think it's a good indicator and I think that there's a reason for that. There kinds of things where speculation is poor is in markets like, the stock market. What does the stock price predict? Well I theoretically, ideally predict some kind of present value of future dividends or earnings. Well but- what's how long into the future is that? A long time into the future because the stock market isn't going away. When you own a company you own it for eternity as long as that company lives. So it's a prediction not of something that's coming right up and is being talked about concretely. It's a prediction about something in the indefinite future. So that market doesn't seem to work as well as a prediction market, as the federal funds futures market. So, I think markets work really well. Market efficiency works really well when it's a short term, clear outcome prediction that is talked about and that is studied. When you look at the federal funds futures market and people who trade in that they seem to be focused on what is that number going to be. When you look at the stock market. It's much more nebulous. And less perfect.