So this is a figure
from the book you have, Irrational Exuberance Third Edition
that I came out with in 2015. And what it shows is,
well first of all that's just the same home price series but since 2003, the same home price series you just saw. Doesn't look as dramatic since it's
a short flip of the longer series. But you can see the home prices peaked in
2006 and they started falling after that. But the other thing shown is the percent of new home buyers who agreed
with a following statement. Real estate is the best investment for
long-term holders who can buy and sell through the ups and
downs of the market. That's a cliche. I mean it's usually done with stocks. But I thought why don't I ask
the same thing of real estate. Now these people just bought a home,
it's called wishful thinking bias. Their likely to think that
their home was a great investment since they just made it. It would cognitive dissonance
if they answered otherwise. But you can see how these are always new
home buyers in every year that I did this survey, and you can see that
it kind of moves with home prices. When home prices have been going up,
so has their agreement with this, and when home prices start going down,
they start losing their agreement. So this is evidence of a bubble, okay? We had initial price increases
on homes in the 1970s. They were doing really
well as investments. People just don't look far back and part of the reason they don't look
far back is nobody shows the data. I find it absolutely flooring
to think that nobody had ever constructed a hundred year price series. Newspapers don't publish
hundred year long time series. They're not interested. It's not what people
seem to think they want. So you only see a few years, and
you see it's just going up like crazy and so, you make the mistake
of thinking it always will. Now, the housing sector has
a big impact on the economy. Through residential investment. Residential investment
in the GDP accounts, consists of building of new houses,
new apartment buildings and improvements. Like additions to houses and
apartment buildings. So the red line is housing
starts in thousands of units. It's a monthly series. SAAR means seasonally
adjusted annual rates. So you can see how variable
it is through time. Also shown on this chart is
the my real home price series. Which the SNPK Schiller
series starting in 1975. And for the region before that, it's an old of labor statistic home
price series that they've discontinued. But I've got it for that period. So have I have a home price series. And you can see that the housing
starts are very, very variable, and they have something
to do with home prices. Not surprisingly when home prices are,
you're a builder, right? You want to know what can
I sell this house for? When home prices are high my
profits margins are high, so I'm going to dump houses on
the market when home prices are high. And I'll stop doing it when they fall. Well, it doesn't explain starts that well,
but somewhat well, right? You can see there was a big
housing boom in the early 70s, and there was a price increase as well. These are prices of existing houses,
not new houses, so it's not necessarily
the exact best price series. But most dramatically the biggest
boom ever is this one in the 1990s until 2006 in home prices new
starts went up to almost a record level. And then suddenly the home
prices collapsed. Dramatically and
look what happened to housing starts. Housing stats went down by 80% and
then they recovered dramatically. And so did home prices. So there's something what, this is
animal spirits driving the economy. I'm calling it animal spirits. It's some idea that people got
that home prices always go up. >> How would you decide whether
a housing market dipped in an area, or country or continent as rational or
not rational? >> [COUGH] Yeah, that's difficult. It's judging people. And it's very hard to predict turning
points when will a bubble burst. So a lot of people would
like to give up and not try to do that at all but
I think that's a mistake too. It's about humans make big mistakes. If you look at history, there are horrible
mistakes that people have made. Often on mass where millions of people
are all thinking the same thing. And it turns out,
how can millions of people be wrong? Well, history shows they've done it again,
and again.