[MUSIC] Congratulations, you
made it through the course. And all the materials and activities to
get you moving as a content marketer. We have covered a lot of
topics in our time together. Including why you should build
your own professional brand, and have your own content
displayed in your own website. Brian Clark and
I walked you through the 7A framework, which really talked about how your content
should be and act, and what it should do. Remember, you need to write
with agility and be authentic. You need to grab your audience's
attention and get them to take action. You need to expand your network to ensure
you establish yourself with authority to the right audience. In the third module, Brian and I took
you through the audience journey, and how you should map their journey when
crafting a content marketing strategy. You'll have a leg up on your competitors
if you develop an empathy map, and apply that to an experience map. When you have these things in place,
you'll be able to write meaningful and fascinating content that will boost
your audience, buyers, sales, leads, whatever your goal might be. Strategic types of content was the topic
of discussion for the fourth module. Brian and I again went with an A-theme and discussed the four types of content
you should have on your site. From attractive content
that looks great visually, think images that will attract attention. But you need to make
your content stand for something if you want to stay
ahead of your competitors. Your content can no longer focus on solving
a problem or satisfy a desire. You have to help your audience believe
before they are going to be able to do business with you. Once you've obtained their attention and
convinced them that you're worth trusting, you must make an audience take action and
view you as an authority. Without those last two pieces, you're probably not going to
grow your business well. [MUSIC] And in the final module of this course,
I talked about managing your content. Basically, how you should present yourself
as a writer and as a human being, when you think about your ethics and
professionalism, and those of your employer or clients. I invited Jessica Frick to dive into
the metrics of our content and help you figure out what data you
should be paying attention to. And finally,
we discussed multimedia content and how you should have a variety
of content in your arsenal. I really hope you found this course
insightful, and the tips and strategies useful for growing your
profession as content marketer. On behalf of UC Davis Extension and
those at Copyblogger and Rainmaker Digital,
I wish you good luck on your journey. And always continue to view
the world as potential content. Until next time.
[MUSIC]