[MUSIC] Hey there, welcome back,
good to see you again. Now, let's talk more
about the 7A Framework. This is a context, a f ramework that
Brian Clark developed for success. It's really how you're going to
think about content so that you can move forward and create the
right kind of content at the right time. We're going to be going into each of
these 7As in more depth in the rest of this module. But I wanted to start
out by identifying and explaining each A from a bird's eye view. Let's get started. So the first A is Agile. And Agile is a mindset. So rather than laying out your
entire strategy from soup to nuts, which still happens in a lot of marketing
departments and a lot of ad agencies. You start out with some guesses and
a good framework, and then you adapt based on that. It's about doing more of what works and
less of what doesn't work. So right from the beginning as you're
laying on a contents strategy for a client, for your organization,
or for yourself. You don't sit down and create the entire
road map before you start recording or before you start writing. Instead what you do is you develop with
good understanding of the audience, we will be talking a lot more
about that in a future session. And then you start mapping out some things
to try and some avenues to explore. You stay agile. The second A is authentic. And this is often misunderstood. This is not about social media oversharing
about what you're having for breakfast. The authenticity part of this framework
is more about the strength and the shareability of a unique,
individual human voice. Specifically, a great writing voice. It's about values driven business and
communication. It's about real human stories. And it's about getting away from bland, schlocky corporate product
that calls itself content but really it's just another form of
mediocre mass produced advertising. It's very much about real writing
voice versus the penny-a-word freelance mill content. And it's your ability to create
what I might call handcrafted or artisanal content as well as
having a solid craft in place. It's about you as the artist,
you as the creator. The third A is Attention. And the first letter of all
copywriting formulas is A. It's either attraction or attention. If you can't get your potential
customer's attention, you really can't do anything else. And of course right now,
we are in a sea of distraction with everything that's available
to us on the internet. And so attention is even more important. This is really about headlines,
hooks, meaning and fascination. It's about relationships with other
publishers so you can get the traffic and the attention you need for your content. So attention has to be captured but
it also has to be sustained. Content marketing needs to
go beyond getting the click. It needs to be about getting sustained and
increasing attention. And this often starts with
either social or search. And then comes into your content homebase. So that will normally be a domain
somewhere on the discoverable web. That's something that you control,
it's not a Facebook or a Tumblr. Then we go deeper into email. Your email list. So, communication by email. Often also this step, this deeper step
will include something like white papers or will include special reports. So, this is a deeper connection,
a deeper level of attention. Their attention is more focused. And you have more opportunity to serve. And serving of course can
also mean making an offer, in other words introducing them
to your product or your service. And you can't talk about attention
without talking about audience, who's attention is it
that you're capturing. An audience is really where
all the good stuff comes from. So at Copyblogger, although we
certainly think about leads, and we certainly think about prospects. We will talk more about a broader
ecosystem which we call the audience. It's a collection of people
that serve various roles. They might be leads,
they might be prospects. They could be existing customers. They could be past customers who might
not use your product or service today but they still advocate for you. They might be people who
because of some scenario, they might not be a good match for
your company. They might not actually use your
product or service but again, they may still advocate for you. That's what I call the second customer. It's the person who shares your content,
who is a big fan of what you do although for whatever reason they might
not buy your product or your service. And one of the most important roles
that theaudience plays is to share their insights. They share their concerns about the topic. They will be your best source for
new product ideas or new angles for your content, new ways to
frame and talk about what you talk about. They are your source for objections,
things that are keeping them from moving forward, talking points for
your content, story ideas. Now, social media tools are brilliant for relationship building with the audience
as well as this listening function. Which too many marketers and
companies forget to do. Even if you do not actively participate
in social media and you probably should. But, even if you never say a word
use those outputs to listen for audience problems, audience concerns,
audience triumphs. But, you never want to build your whole
platform there and you need to make sure that your organization or your customer,
your client understands that as well. Social media is not a place
to build your business. It's a place to grow your business
by making new connections with new audience members. And then bringing them home to some
kind of a content home base hub, that lives on a domain our
organization controls. So the fifth A is authority. And authority is really about
becoming a likeable expert. An expert that your
audience can relate to. It's not about arrogance. Arrogance is not one of the seven As. Authority is about combining meaning and
fascination. So you know what you're talking about and
you're able to teach the audience something that helps them solve
a problem that they care about. But you do it in a human relatable way. This does tie back to authenticity. It's the human voice. It's one on one. Small is beautiful. And yet
you do know what you are talking about. You're not just some fellow stumbler
on the path in the darkness. You have a torch to light the way. You can show them something
that they care about. And when I say you,
that's you as the content marketer expressing the voice again of
your organization, your client. But you also do it for
yourself and your own marketing. The sixth A is action which is really
about sales and lead generation. This is where is somebody
is going to take action on the content that you've been creating. So, this is sometimes called
direct response copywriting and some people would just
call this copywriting. This is about writing that persuades. Writing that motivates somebody in your
audience to take a specific action. For example, sign up for an email opt-in
list, make a purchase, register to vote, take a political action, make
a donation to a nonprofit organization. The collection of actions you need
your prospects and leads to take. That's where the action step comes in. So, as a content marketer
sometimes you are going to work with a dedicated specialist on this. So, your client or your organization may be working with an ad agency with
a dedicated direct response copywriter. And sometimes, probably more often, it's
going to be up to you to make this happen. So, we do have a copywriting 101
e-book that will help you master the fundamentals of persuasive copy. And if you take a look at that,
you'll be ahead a lot of your colleagues. Persuasive writing is its own art form and
it is really well worth studying, and there are some good courses out there. But more than that, I would really recommend just
become a student of persuasion. We will give you lots of
resources to do that, and all of these seven As do have
accompanying deep dives. So trust me. We will have a nice deep dive
on the action step four you, to talk about persuasive writing. We also have a whole section
coming later in the course about specific kinds of persuasive content,
things like landing pages. And then,
the seventh one is kind of a funny one that doesn't have a set
of defined action steps. Because it's really about the doors
that open that you don't even know might be there. The seventh A is called acceleration. And as a content marketer,
as a content authority, you're going to find things that come
your way that you hadn't thought about. And if you think about Brian Clark,
who founded the Copyblogger blog. Out of the Copyblogger blog,
he developed a couple of relationships with businesspeople that turned into
spinoff businesses of their own. And at a certain point in Brian's career,
he had so many of these plates that were sort of revolving,
that he really felt for his own sanity. And also to get some synergy, sorry to use a business buzzword,
but in this case it is apt. And he pulled together selected partners
from his spinoff companies into a new organization and that organization
is called Copyblogger Media. And that has become a pretty
good sized company. But it really started with one blog,
an authoritative content marketing blog. And you are really starting
in the same place. Because of course you
are going to have your own site where people can interact with you. And where people can understand
that you are a content authority. So I'm not necessarily saying you're
going to start the next Copyblogger Media. Although you absolutely could. But you might be approached with
offers to partner with a business, to a teach a course on something you know. To lead a presentation, speak in front of a group that you might
not have felt confident approaching. Content opens doors, and you don't always
know which doors are going to be opened. So keep an open mind, stay mindful,
stay light on your feet, stay agile. And make solid relationships
with everyone. So that broke blogger that
you hang out with today really could be the CEO of a multi
million dollar company in a few years. I have people in my life that this is true
of and you will have people in your life. That they're just nice people,
they're cool to hang out with today, they're not doing a lot that's
really changing the world. And they will invent themselves and
reinvent themselves and create some epic stuff. So be mindful, be nice, and be flexible. Keep cultivating your network,
anybody who is smart and interesting is somebody you
want to keep a relationship with. Effective content marketers
have killer networks. So start promoting yours now,
start developing yours now. Whether you're an introvert or you're
an extrovert cultivate your network.