[MUSIC] Well, hello there,
fellow content marketer. My name is Sonia Simone and
welcome to this introductory content marketing strategy course, designed
in partnership with UC Davis Extension. I want to let you know what
to expect as we move forward. So if you're not familiar with me and what
I do, I'm the Chief Content Officer for Rainmaker Digital, which is the new name
of the company that used to be called Copyblogger Media and you might know
that name from the Copyblogger blog. That was founded about ten years ago by
a man named Brian Clark who wanted to explore the intersection
between copywriting. In other words, professional writing with
an intention to persuade and blogging. Which today,
we would describe as the social web, including all the social network platforms
as well as all those types of audience engaging content that have become more and more prevalent. Brian Clark is going to present
many of these lessons with me. Others, I'm going to present to
you solo or with another guest. This course is going to present a lot of
ideas and a lot of concepts to you, and you're not going to be able to
fully benefit from these ideas and concepts until you actually
start to put them into practice. And that's why my very first
recommendation to you is to get a site of your own started if you haven't started one already. As a content professional,
a website that you own and you control is one of the most
important assets you will ever develop. It's a place where you can show off
your skills and it's a place where you can practice your strategic thinking and
your implementation. As you go through the different lessons
in the course, listen to the lesson or read the transcript if
you prefer to do that. And look over the optional materials, then
put the ideas in place on your own site. That's how you're going to
make them meaningfully your own. That's how you're going to benefit
from using them in the context of a professional environment. This is just a fancy way of saying
you should have a blog, yes and no. Yes, I'm talking about a blog,
but it's more than that and that's really what this
course is all about. It’s a strategic content marketing asset
that's designed to show off what you have to offer and make it easier to, quote
unquote, do business with you. Now that might mean bringing
you on as a full-time employee, it also might mean bringing you
on as a contract freelancer. Although this is designed as
an introductory course, we're going to be going pretty deep on content strategy,
because content marketing, just like your favorite sport, is all about executing the
fundamentals at the very highest level. So the better you get at the so-called
introductory aspects, things like crafting strong shareable headlines or highlighting
the benefits of a product or service. The better you get at those things, the better content marketer
you're going to be. I just want to thank you so much for
starting out on this journey with us. If I can borrow a quote
from the movie Repo Man, the life of a content
marketer is always intense. This is actually an incredibly dynamic and
growing field, and there are some fantastic opportunities for a self-starter, like you, who wants to
learn more and grow as a professional. So without further ado,
let's get it started. Thank you so much for joining us. I'm really,
really glad to have you in this course. [MUSIC]