[MUSIC] Hey there, it's good to see you again. The next three lessons tie together and fall under the theme building
your professional brand. There are a lot of important roles in
every company, support, IT, accounting, sales, management. Your role has some special differences. In a perfect world everyone who works in
a company is creative, and they're playing their creativity their work, but for
you it's much more front and center. It's much more apart of who
you are as a professional, and what you get recognized for. In this lesson we'll discuss why
being a content marketer is different than most career paths, and examine how to
build a platform for your personal brand. You're a lot more like a designer
then someone for example, in IT is. You're a creative worker, and a big part
of what you bring to the table is your talent and your ability and
specifically your individual voice. So that's why it's really
important in this course that you not just absorb the information,
but that you put it into practice and that you
do that where somebody else can see it. Writing content is not like writing a
novel, it's not like painting a watercolor where you might work for a long time
without showing that work to anybody else. It's a lot more like a play. You don't really know if it works until
you get it in front of an audience. And another factor to these is that what
you're going to learn in this course to plan content strategy for your clients,
or for your company, your organization, you are also going to use to
market yourself as a professional. You are going to do your content
marketing for the brand of you. And I know personal brand
is kind of a overused term, sort of annoying term,
but it's the best we have. So your big assignment for this course is
going to be to get that, quote unquote, personal brand platform watched. And then throughout the course,
you're going to get assignments and an important part of that assignment is to
publish what you create on that platform. So you have a couple of
options to make this happen. And the most important thing that
you have to know about this, is that you want to create this
platform on a domain that you own. So if you're not super tactical, a domain is just the www name
of your website dot com. It's the specific name of
a particular web address. Now, what we recommend most often for this
kind of work is, self hosted WordPress. And what that means is,
you go to a domain register store, you buy a domain, you go to a hosting
company, you get a hosting account, then you install the WordPress software,
and you're up and running. And the reason this is good
is it's very self contained. You own it, you control it,
there really aren't any terms and conditions you have to abide by, you can
do anything you want to with advertising, you can have any kind of
content you want on there. You don't want to use Facebook,
Tumblr, LinkedIn. Those are great sites for getting the word
out about who you are as a professional, but you don't want your brand to live
there, because they come and they go, they can and do take accounts down for
reasons that are not always necessarily fair and you just don't know what are they
going to look like in five years. You don't want your personal
brand living on a facebook.com, a LinkedIn.com,
it needs to live in your own domain. And of course,
you don't have to use WordPress. The advantage to it is it's very flexible, it's easy to use, you can do a lot
of things with it, it's robust, it's scalable, and
it's also used in a lot of organizations. So, if you are comfortable and
familiar with WordPress, that's a good skill to have, and it's not
hard to develop if you had your own site. So if you don't have a site,
go grab a domain if you don't have one. Ideally it would be your name, it depends
of course, on how common your name is. Can be some phrase you like, so I started off my personal site
is RemarkableCommunication.com. Doesn't matter a whole lot where you
register it but do know that there are a lot of options to those big name
brands that take out Superbowl ads.