[MUSIC] So today I want to talk about attention. And attention is as I've mention elsewhere very often the first letter
in a copyrighting formula. And a lot of advertising evolves mostly
around the tension because if we can't capture the prospects attention, the audience's attention,
we really can't do anything else. We do live in an environment with a lot of
distraction, with a lot of competition for our time and attention. And so content marketers need
to get really really smart about how to capture attention and
how to sustain attention. Now, there are numbers of
components to this but, the parameter what I'm going to
talk about today is headlines. And that's because if the headline
doesn't work, nothing else will either. This is one of the quickest most
beneficial things you can do as content marketer as supposed
to someone who's good at writing. Somebody who,
maybe has a degree in creative writing or good at putting words together. They're creative, they have a good voice. The ability to put together a good
headline is really a bit of marketing craft that takes
all your talents as a writer. And it really, really amplifies them and
makes them incredibly more effective. At the end of this lesson,
you should be able to identify and recognize where to look for effective
headlines and formulate new ones. So, let's get started. So one thing you should understand about
the headline, a headline has one job, and that's to get the first
line of the copy read. What are the first few seconds of
the video watched, or the first few seconds of the audio listened to,
that's all the headline really is for. It doesn't have to educate the prospect,
it doesn't have to do anything other than just, get their attention, and
get them to start consuming the content. And in fact,
the role of the first few lines or the first few seconds of your content is
to get them to keep reading the content and as the audience member
gets sort of sucked in, and gets off, and rolling, and
gets engages, and gets interested. Then we start doing all of the marketing
craft we start giving them then if it's and we start over coming objections and
all of the styles techniques that we use. But, the role of the headline
is just to get than reading it. So, it is a common best practice
to write your headline first. So before you going to
write a piece of content, sit down and knock out some ideas for
headlines and I'm going to walk you through an exercise
for that at this end of this lesson. So it's a good idea to write
your headline first and then you may very well adapt it a little
bit once the piece is completed. You may find that you've
added a few things or discovered an interesting hook or
an angle that you want to exploit. But write the headline first so you have
something focused to hang your piece on. One of the biggest sins of less capable content creators is
they just ramble all over the place. The content goes here and
there and everywhere. Writing the headline first
will help you stay on point. So my first tip for
you on headlines is to steal them, which I know sounds kind of scary or
strange, but there are some people out there who are crafting
beautiful headlines that you can adapt. Okay, creatively adapt. You're not going to run them as is, but you can adapt headlines that
are working well for your own content. And that's one of the best ways to
really internalize the structure and the look and feel of a really
solid professional headline. So a classic tried and true place to
do this, believe it or not oddly enough is magazines in general, in fact you can
go to a so called magazines.com, and you will have access to hundreds
of different magazine covers and you can look at the headlines
they put on the cover. Magazines write their headlines to
get people to pick up the magazine in the bookstore, the supermarket,
and bring it home. So headlines matter a lot to magazines and they will tend to put their most
capable experienced writers and editors into the job of getting
the right headlines on the cover and headlines for popular magazines
tend to work even better. And my favorite, as odd as it might seem,
is Cosmopolitan Magazine. Cosmopolitan Magazine,
the quality of the headline writing, whatever you might want to say
about the quality of the articles, the headlines are really well-crafted. So, you can just pull up magazines.com,
you can go over to Cosmopolitan, and you can look at the headline structures. And then think about, how could I
adapt that headline for my own use? So for example, I did really well with
a post that I wrote early on in my career. I saw a Cosmopolitan article called
50 Things Guys Wish You Knew. And I changed it to 50
Things Your Customers Wish You Knew. It was really popular post who did really
well, again I started with the headline and then I figured out how I'm going to
fill this in, what I'm going to create that's valuable and interesting
that I can fill this show with. And of course, there's lots of
other magazines that are popular that you can use to do this with. You tend to get the best bang for your buck by going with magazines
that are not in your topic. So if your topic is fitness and
weight loss, then don't go to men's health,
go to something completely different. You'll just tend to get a better
result if you use the health and fitness magazines and you're in a health
and fitness topic, you're going to end up with samey samey kind of headlines
that aren't going to stand out. And headlines have to stand
out to get clicked on and another place you can go
to adapt headlines from or whatever the social media
traffic of the darling might be. So, there's always a handful of sites that
are just getting tons and tons of traffic. They all tend to adhere to
fairly rigid headline formulas. And so,
pick one that you can live with again, even better if it's outside of
your topic and then, adapt it. And keep adapting until it
doesn't feel too dopey, so, there's a headline formula
at the moment that's so popular that is just about to
burst which is, this man took his kids to the fast food drive through and
you won't believe what happen next. So that one is the timer recording is
really tired as people are starting to make fun of it, so you want to pick
a formula or a framework that you can adapt without, just wanting to go to
sleep because its so [INAUDIBLE] boring. However, also realize that as an artist
you probably kind of sensitive to advertising messages, and probably a little allergic to
advertising messages, so just because its sounds like an odd doesn't mean
it might not be a great headline. So you have to get over your
own allergy to advertising and promotion if you want to
work in marketing. It's just part of the game. So if it sounds hype-y sometimes
you want to get a second look or sleep on it, or really look at it and
say is this hype-y, or is this just effective and
I'm a tiny bit uncomfortable with that? And one thing about headlines is
every scenario is different, and every organization is different, and so
a headline that would work really well for a smaller blog will often feel
a little too hype-y a copy blogger. Copy blogger will do better with
some more restrained headlines not making the life changing promise but
making a quieter promise. But that's because our readers are
students of advertising and marketing and they've just seen it all, done it all when
it comes to the big promise headlines. Offering your scenario
might be really different. So think about that, and
always test your headlines. Just observe, again going back to
the agile component of the seven a's, watch what tends to do
well with your audience. For example, if you send emails, which
emails tend to get opened more often? If you have blog posts, which posts
tend to get more shares and clicks. There are sometimes certain words that
will do really well with one audience, and they just kind of fizzle with another, words like breakthrough or any of
the kind of power advertising words. Okay, so you can go a long way stealing
headline ideas from people who are doing it well, and then of course, creatively
adapting them to your own content. But that's not the only
thing to keep in mind.