[MUSIC] In the last lesson, we covered why you need to build your own
website to help market you as a brand. In this lesson, I'll explain some tips for building your professional brand website
such as not using advertising on your page, using your name for search engine
optimization and building your portfolio. Wordpress.com is a commercial organization that is an arm of
WordPress the publishing software and that's a good option if you don't want
to figure out the technology for now. Now they do have some restrictions. For example, let's say your site get hacked and some
bad guy was putting spam on your site. WordPress.com could take away your
ability to post to your site, because you're posting spam,
your publishing spam. There are some limitations and
it's a really good idea to figure out how to do the do it yourself
variety at some point. WordPress.com is easy, it's quick to
get started, it's not a big hurdle and you can always make the transition
later if you want to. In fact, WordPress.com does
make it pretty easy to do this. You can even register your
domain there on WordPress.com. They charge a fee. It's a little more than some of the other
registrars, but only a few dollars. It is a small annual fee to have your
own domain on a WordPress.com site, but it's really, really worth it. Something that I am going to
make the argument is important, is please don't put
advertisement on your site. A lot of people does this to try and pay the couple of dollars a month
that it costs to host the site. If you're on your own domain, I think it's
less than $20 a year on WordPress.com and a lot of people try and
offset those costs with advertising. The problem is,
there's a couple of problems. First, it slows down your
site's loading time and that has negative implications with
Google and other search engines. But actually a lot more
important than that, is that when you have some kind of an ad
network running ads on your content, you really have very little control
over what kind of ads show up there. t think they give you some basic controls, like they're not going to put
an ad to some adult content site. But you really can't vouch for
the ethics or the business practices of the companies
that are advertising on your site, you really just don't want to do that. You only make a few cents anyway,
it's very, very small revenue stream. It cheapens your site,
it slows your site down and it just makes it look like a lot of other
spammy, not very high quality sites. So, I would not put any
advertising on your site. I would spend a couple of dollars, I believe that you can get
premium themes on WordPress.com. Those are just better looking themes
than the basic ones they have. Again, very, very cost effective for
just a better looking site, a site that has some design to it and
looks good. Why are you doing this? What are the benefits? First one is that over time,
you will probably rank for your name, and
that depends on what your name is. My name is Sonia Simone, and it was quite
easy for me to rank for my own name. When employees Google my name and
employers Google my name or prospective clients Google my name, up I come
right at the top of the search engine. And that's a good thing, you're controlling what people
see when they look for your name. Now, my business partner's name is Brian
Clark, it's a common name and there are in fact some other people who have done
notable things who also have that name. So it took him longer to rank for
his name. Just depending what your name is, it varies quite a bit in how
difficult it's going to be. I'm going to give you a tip
right at the end of this for how to help if you have a common name
that a lot of other people share. Because it's very useful
as a contact marketing professional to write for your own name. Rank, of course, meaning appearing
at the top of the search engine results when somebody types into Google or
Bing or Yahoo for your name. Something that you want is right
near the top of the results. The other benefit is that this is
a place to put your portfolio. Over time, throughout your career, you want to add links to any content
that's on the web that you created for a company, whether you are a freelancer or
an employee. It's also a place to put your
personality and put your writing. Now hopefully, it goes without saying, you
do not want to put your drunk spring break photos here, depending on what kind
of company you're applying to. Give people a sense of what
it's like to work with you. Show friendly, interesting
professionalism and go ahead and talk about your philosophy of content,
your philosophy of writing, business lessons you've learned,
things like that. For this kind of site, you want to keep things overall
very positive as a general rule. There are a few people, almost all of them are freelancers, who
can make a sort of snarky crankiness work. It can work but if you are looking
to work in a larger organization, it tends to be the kind
of thing that HR managers don't have an awesome amount
of sense of humor about. Overall, you want to keep things very
positive, professional, but not boring.