[MUSIC] Hey there, welcome back,
this is Sonia Simone. And today, I want to explore two essential
elements of irresistible content. This session is very heavenly borrowed
from a post Brian Clark wrote from Copyblogger under the same title. We've ask our audience from the past, what's your biggest challenge when
creating compelling online content? And rather than treating it as a poll or a
survey that have to find specific answers, we wanted pure unfiltered responses, and the number one answer was some version
of keeping it original and interesting. So that's what we're
going to explore today, the two keys necessary to
create irresistible content. So the two elements that really lead to
reader engagement, fantastic social media sharing, and that gotta have it now
impulse are meaning and fascination. So let's unpack each
of those a little bit. Starting with meaning, this is the
informational aspect of your content that your regular readers, listeners or
viewers look to you for. This is also a topic that matters to
the perspective audience you're trying to reach through social media sharing. Another way to think of the important
aspect of meaning is relevance. Content needs to be highly relevant to
exist in your prospective audience. But a copy blogger would prefer the word
meaning because it implies an extra level of value that makes people
really treasure you. And the second element that's
important is fascination. The fascinating eliminator content
is where the creativity comes in. That's the fun, shocking or entertaining
aspect of your content that makes people pay attention and
share it with your friends and colleagues. So this might come from
using an analogy a metaphor, to make an associated connection
between something that's cool and an important topic that might
otherwise be kind of boring. Not only does this attract and
hold attention, but it also helps with comprehension and
retention for your audience. Which in turn increases your
authority with them because they actually learned something. So let me give you a few examples
from the Copyblogger Blog and then we'll pick out the meaning and
fascination elements of each one. The first one was a post that
Brian Clark wrote called, Five Things Depeche Mode Can Teach
You About Effective Online Marketing. So with this article, the meaning
is expressed by promising to share information about
effective online marketing. And the fascination element is that pop
culture reference to the 80s group, Depeche Mode, which is going to
intrigue fans of the band and at least, if nothing else, prompt some
curiosity from people wondering how the hell Bryan's going to
make this analogy work. So using another example, how I became a better writer thanks to
distracted, hung over college kids. So instead of going with a pop
culture reference on this one, this article took a different,
but still kind of improbable, intriguing source of fascination to
deliver the meaning that readers of Copyblogger are looking for,
which is how to write better. And the third one, five things a bad dog
can teach you about writing good copy. So the bad dog is
the fascinating element and writing good copy is the meaning element. So we have noticed that a lot of people,
especially people on professional services or Industries that are a little
bit more conservative, like law or medicine, are afraid to go out on a limb
and throw in the fascination element, they're just not comfortable with it. And we would really argue that these are
the people who have the most to gain from breaking out from what's conventional and
stirring the pot a little bit. So pop-culture is an easy place
to work for fascination elements. Depending on your topic and your audience
in some audiences is a little over done in fact a copy blogger we don't use as
many pop-culture references anymore, because our audience just wants
to see something new from us. But you could also get a lot of
mileage out of industry inside jokes. That's a great one, things that are hanging around in your
industry on Facebook or Twitter right now. And references that are totally
obscured to outsiders. because remember, you don't care
what anyone thinks other than your target audience. And one thing to keep in mind is that from
post to post, it is possible that you will bond much more strongly with a small
segment of the people you talked to. So one article might speak
strongly to some and another article might speak strongly to
another and don't let that worry you. That is okay and normal, and really shows
that you're doing a good job of really making a very focused connection
with a few selected individuals. So the point is to bond strongly with
someone rather than boring everyone. And the final point on this, if you have
to explain your terribly clever reference, it's probably too obscure. Clarity matters more, no matter how
cool the author thinks it might be. Now, you can also intrigue people with an
overwhelming amount of relevant meaning, so that the topic is so
meaningful that that becomes fascinating. And this is where we
get into the list post, the how to articles that tend to go
viral just because they're valuable. So they're not using a hook or angle for the fascination, they're just
using their sheer usefulness, and the key to this kind of engaging
content is really, specificity. The more specific the value
you promise and provide, the more fascinating people
are going to find it. And specificity is, in and
of itself, a fascination element. So some examples that we have published,
109 Ways to Make Your Business Irresistible to the
Media, The Simple Five Step Formula for Effective Online Content, The Four
Words That Will Get Your Email Open. So all of those did incredibly well
because the promise made was so specific and there was a promise made
of value that our audience cared about. And so, those became fascinating in and
of themselves. Now, you might of figured out this is also
how you write really great headlines. So in each of the examples that we've
given, you can spot the intersection and meaning and
fascination from the headline alone. And that's why meaning and fascination is actually one of our
secrets to engaging content and to create headlines because without
delivering the promise in the headline, without letting people know of the awesome
value they're going to get by reading, they'll never click through and they'll never find your
content in the first place. And they also will not
share it on social media. So you want to reference the Headlines
101 e-book that comes with this lesson, but remember that the title of your
article or the title of your content is really a compelling promise
of what that content offers. And that's why we recommend that
you write the headline first. When you come up with an intersection
of meaning and fascination, and then boil that down to a working title,
and then deliver on the promise
by crafting the content. And it does sometimes happen that
when you're creating the content, you'll uncover some angles, or some hooks,
or some intriguing or fascinating element, and you might go back and
rework the headline. But that's a way to make sure that your
content is living up to a significant promise. So if you find you can't deliver on the
promise, and a Brand's example would be, What Mark Zuckerberg Can Teach You About
Empathy, you just wouldn't be able to write that article,
you wouldn't be able to find the material. Then you gotta scrap the idea and
find another one. Don't strain to make a bad analogy work,
look for another pairing of meaning and fascination. because once you understand
what you're looking for, you will truly find them everywhere. So of course, there are all kinds
of tactics, tips, and tricks for making your content more interesting and
making it more fascinating. The important thing is to make sure that
everything you create, whether it's audio, text, video, slide share,
what have you has both of those elements. It has meaning to the audience,
it delivers something they care about, typically in the form of solving
a problem they care about. But it gives them some meaning,
some relevance. And then, it does it in a fascinating way. So it creates curiosity, interest. Could be humor,
could be great story telling. It's interesting,
it's written an interesting way, it uses an interesting writer's voice. Meaning and fascination are really kind of
a one, two punch that make content work. It makes valuable to your audience, it persuades the audience of your authority
or the authority of your organization. It gets social shares, it gets links. Really, meaning and fascination are just
that one two punch that are going to deliver the value that you need for
content. So that's it for today, quick lesson but an important
one in all the content you create. And thank you so much for
your time and attention. This is Sonia Simone.