[MUSIC] Hey there, in the last lesson, I introduced you to the first three
steps of a one, two, three, four, five formula, as it applies to
the action A of the seven A framework. In this lesson, I'll continue
summarizing the steps within the formula by discussing the 4th and 5th steps. You'll be able to apply and use these
steps within your content marketing strategy, to turn your work into a sale or
some other desired behavior. So let's dive in. The next thing you want to do is describe
specifically what the person does next to move forward with the purchase. It's called a Call to Action. Some of you are very familiar with this,
some of you this might be some what new. A call to action is extremely specific,
it is clear, and it is not clever. So for example, click here to add
the item to your shopping cart. Okay, usability experts and
search experts will tell you, click here is terrible, everybody knows
to click on a link, it's embarrassing. Okay, but the fact is with the words
click here will very often test better. Telling someone click here to complete
your purchase will very often test better than just having a link that
says complete your purchase. And we'll talk about
testing in a little bit. But sometimes calls to action are so
specific and so clear they feel a little strange
when you're writing them. And very often if somebody, for
example in your organization says, well this sounds kind of salesy, and
they're making that face that people make. It's because it feels like advertising. Well clear calls to action do feel
like advertising because effective advertising uses very,
very clear calls to action. So I'm not telling you make your company
sound like some kind of a Sham Wow infomercial. But you do have to make sure
that it is extremely clear and simple, simple language, direct language. And you're going to tell
the audience member what action to take to move
forward with the sale. And you know, not every sale progresses
in just a, I read a page of web copy and then I click a link and
then I put my credit card information in. So it's about moving forward
toward the purchase, whether it's towards the final point
where you enter your credit card, or if it's leading up to that point
like signing up for a email list. Very very clear and specific. And I have an additional article for you that will help you understand
how to formulate calls to action. And in the fifth element,
it doesn't have to be in place but it will normally tend to make
things work much better when it is. Is what's called Risk Reversal. For most products and services,
this would be a money-back guarantee. So if you're not happy with
how this is working out for you, you have 30 days
to get your money back. But it's not only that. Risk reversal is about reversing or
reducing the anxiety that the customer or client has when
they're moving forward with the purchase. And the biggest thing that we're anxious
about when making a purchase will boil down to, if this thing doesn't work, if
this is just all a cleverly written ad for something that's not good quality,
I'm going to feel like an idiot. I'm going to feel dumb for
making a poor purchase. That's the primary risk that you're
actually trying to reverse here. So guarantees are excellent
when you can offer them. When you can, put them close to your
call to action because the idea is to reduce the anxiety at that moment,
when they're going to take the action. There are some other good things
you can do like, for example, the badges for website security. If you have one of these that says,
we're following the correct practices for handling your credit card. Those can be very good to have, again, at the point when the person's
entering that information. A Better Business Bureau badge
can be very useful because it helps alleviate our anxiety. Something like a testimonial can
be a great risk reversal strategy. Because right at that point, when that
person's a little bit on the fence, yes or no, I want to do it, my emotional brain is telling me
that it wants all these benefits. My logical brain is backing it up and
saying, well, there's good evidence here, this is a good thing to do. But my fear brain, and we all know
it's what's called the lizard brain, it's the little part
deep inside the brain. It's very primitive, it's very old,
and it's very powerful. And if the fear of making
a mistake is too great, even too great in the sense that it's just
creating a question in that person's mind, that person won't move forward. And a testimonial from someone saying,
I was afraid that this wasn't going to work well for
me but actually, it worked fantastic. It just worked really, really well for me. Something that sends that
message can be what's needed to quiet the fear brain down and
let the buying brain move forward. And incidentally, most good copywriters,
persuasive copywriters, are students of neuroscience,
brain science and psychology. What motivates people to do things? What motivates people to take
this action versus that action? So I will include lots of resources for
you, both copywriting books, but also a few scientific books and
psychology books that will help you understand more about why people
make the decisions that they do. So that you can influence them
positively in of course an ethical way. And the reality is although there
are people out there who try to sell you something different,
you cannot mind control your prospects. There's no copywriting trick that you are
ever going to learn that is going to make people magically move
toward the buy button and enter their credit card number
when they don't want to. In Glengarry Glen Ross' fiction doesn't
work that way and it really doesn't work that way with web copywriting,
it's just to easy to click away. So a lot of good writers are very
nervous about selling because they feel like it's unfair or deceptive or
manipulative or unethical. But I will reassure you now there is
nothing you're ever going to learn that's going to make people buy
something they don't want to buy. Unless you just out right tell lies,
and you're not going to do that. You're not going to lie and
say it's taller or bigger or whatever it is that it is. And if you are non-deceptive in your
marketing there are no tricks you can play that will magically hypnotize people. So that might seem odd for me to bring
up but I've talked to enough writers who get queasy about persuasive writing
because they think they're somehow there's something, forceful about it or
coercive about it. It's not coercive, all it is is
just presenting your product or service in a way that lets
people make the right decision. And the right decision might be no,
it's not for me, and that's totally okay. Okay, so this one, two three,
four, five formula or framework can be delivered over time. So it can be delivered in
an email sequence, and that online has historically proven to be
a very high ROI, very effective way to go. It can also run as a series of
threads through your blog content. So that on a regular schedule, you would have some content that was
designed to communicate risk reversal. And you would have some
content that was designed to let the prospect see themselves
enjoying the benefit of the purchase. And you would schedule regular
time to talk about the logical and emotional benefits of your solution. And of course these elements sometimes
are also delivered on a single page, this is often called a sales page. And this is an art form,
but if you cover these five elements you'll know that you've
taken a pretty good shot at it. There are people at it
who are brilliant and command hundreds of thousands of dollars
to write a single, web page of copy. Most of us aren't there and most companies that's not a resource
that is going to work for them anyway. So, you just try and become a student of the art form and keep
testing yourself and keep getting better. So speaking of testing, the true
direct response methodology coming particularly from direct mail,
from junk mail, if you will. We'll take different approaches and test them against each other
to see which one wins. So, a classic example would be,
they have an envelope for a financial newsletter and the envelope
has some wording on the outside designed to get you to open the envelope. And I'll test that wording. Well this phrase worked
better than that phrase. And then they go and they keep trying to
improve their copy by sending it out and seeing which one gets the best response. Some organizations are setup for
this and some aren't. If you want to be a ninja you
should really make a point of getting this practice
into your experience set. If nothing else you can write a short
e-book on some topic you know something about and test different sales approaches. You're going to learn a lot by doing that. You set up a program
called Google Analytics, it is free, you learn how to use it. Google has just a ton of
information about how to set it up, and you set up a couple of simple tests. There is really not a lot of
substitute for just trying it out but you can try it out on
a really small scale. And again we do have
quite a few resources for you on this topic because
it's a study intensive topic. And so the most important thing is
just get those five elements of the framework kind of as part of your DNA. So that you know that you're going
to need to cover those bases if you want to persuade someone. Remember, it applies just as much for
a nonprofit or a political organization as it does for
a commercial enterprise. Persuasion is persuasion. And if you are interested in moving
forward with this, this is a very valuable skill set for you to have as a writer,
to be able to write persuasively. It is well compensated. So we'll give you a lot of resources
if you want to go deeper on that and really become a student
of that kind of writing. Some content marketers are,
and some aren't, and it's perfectly great both ways. We all have our strengths. So, go with what interests you,
what you're willing to practice, what you're willing to study. And develop the strengths
that are natural to you. And that's how you're going to be
most effective as a professional. So that's the Action A. Hope that has been useful and
helpful to you. And in the next session we're
going to talk about acceleration. So looking forward to seeing you there. This is Sonia Simone.