Hello everyone, and welcome to the next
week of your MOOC in Animal Behavior and Welfare here at
the University of Edinburgh. This week, we're going to be
looking at the behavior and welfare of wild animals that
are managed under human care. For simplicity, we'll refer to them
as wild animals in captivity and I'll talk a little bit later
about why we use that term. Today, we'll be looking at animals that
are managed within the zoo context. And animal welfare is a fundamental
part of what all good zoos do. The role of the modern zoo involves
education, conservation, and research. And animal welfare is an essential
foundation for these activities. We can't produce good conservation
programs where animals are engaging in natural breeding activities or are fit for reintroduction into the wild if the
welfare of those animals is not excellent. We also cannot educate the public
about natural wild animal behaviors if animal
welfare isn't ensured and those animals are not exhibiting those
behaviors in the captive setting. Good animal welfare is also essential for
ensuring that good and valid research data is collected. If animals are physiologically stressed or
emotionally stressed, then they're not going to give us
good research data to collect. And so we can see that good animal
welfare is the cornerstone of all of the activities that good
zoos may be engaged in. [SOUND] We can provide good welfare by
taking a behavior-based husbandry approach to how we manage animals. This means that we don't focus
on what we're providing, we're focusing on what the animal's
behavior is telling us that it needs by recognizing that all of the animals
behaviors are meaningful and, therefore, helpful in informing
us of what an animal may need. Behavior based husbandry incorporates
all elements of good animal welfare, good health, psychological well being,
and natural behavioral expression. Behavior-based husbandry considers not
just elements, such as enclosure design or enrichment, but also human animal
relationships, the animal's choices with regards to its environment, mating
opportunities or social interactions, and a level of control over its
environment and its daily routines. Positive human animal interactions are the
foundation of providing good welfare for the animals that we manage. If we consider that these animals rely
on us to provide for all of their needs. Food, shelter, enrichment,
mating opportunities and companionship, we can understand that if we are
aggressive, unpredictable, or negative in our interactions to our animals,
we can create significant stress for them. Perhaps we're having a bad day or we're
worried about something in our lives. That may be the case, but
our animals do not understand that. And if we are abrupt, unresponsive, or short-tempered with them,
our behavior can create anxiety for them. It is important to recognize
that not all stress is negative. Continuous or high level stress from which
an animal cannot escape can be negative, and may mean that an animal is no longer
able to cope with its captive environment. On the other hand, an environment which
does not offer any kind of challenge may be safe for an animal, but can also be
both physically and mentally frustrating. Just as we humans engage in interesting
and exciting activities, such as sports or socializing, to stimulate our minds and bodies, it is important that we provide
animals with similar challenges. Opportunities for mating, enrichment, and social interaction can all
provide positive, stimulating and short-term stress,
which may be beneficial for our animals. Operant conditioning is increasingly
popular in captive wildlife facilities to facilitate the husbandry procedures and
support the human and animal bond. In order to train animals, most facilities
employ a positive reinforcement methodology, recognizing that punishment
and negative reinforcement often end up creating unnecessary anxiety and fear
in order to force particular behaviors. In these videos, we can see direct
punishment of an elephant hit with a stick and negative reinforcement of elephants
in a circus, where the trainers are using hand held spikes to force
the elephants into position. Positive reinforcement rewards
the desired behaviors and so, if delivered properly, should not be
stressful for the animal being trained. Whilst operant conditioning may
provide cognitive enrichment for our animals, it's important that in order
to do so, it is properly delivered. And the animal is adequately rewarded for
its efforts. Any operant conditioning or training
program must be both progressive and enjoyable in order to be enriching for
the animal. Training programs, which are repetitive,
boring, or which create frustration for the animal may have
a negative welfare impact. The management of training
sessions is important. By engaging interactions with our animals,
we must recognize that we may create disruption to their daily
routines and normal social interactions. Separating an animal from its conspecifics
for training may create stress, anxiety, or frustration in
the individuals not selected to receive the additional attention and food
rewards that training programs confer. Additionally, if training programs
are not well-planned or structured or delivered, they may create frustration or
confusion. And this can lead to a negative experience
for both the animal and the trainer. It is also important to understand that
interactions with our animals should be much broader than just
intimate in training sessions. In this video,
we see a socially isolated chimpanzee. He has lived alone since its mate
died a few years before, and since then his social interaction
has been limited to his keepers. As the keeper focus is on cleaning,
feeding, and basic husbandry, and they have had limited
training in animal behavior, they have, so far, been unable to recognize his need for
social interaction. We can see a visiting applied ethologist,
who understands his social cues, and is responding to his communication and desire for social interaction,
engaging in play behavior with him. For social animals,
such as a chimpanzee, this type of social interaction is vitally important to
ensuring that the animal does not suffer. Similarly, here we see
a singly housed gibbon, who's on the floor of her enclosure and
pressed against the barrier, attempting to solicit contact for
social grooming from humans. As the barrier is very narrow, we had to use a stick to provide
her with tactile contact. Throughout the process, she turned and
presented each side of her body. Tactile grooming like this is
essential for social primates. But it is important that we
consider social interactions and how our own behavior may impact
the emotional states of all of the species that we keep in captivity. Environmental or cognitive enrichment is often seen as
a panacea for many behavioral problems. But whilst they can be very useful,
it needs to be applied strategically with clear goals in mind and
a recognition of possible limitations. For example, in this photograph, the bear has been provided
with an enriched environment. It has been given a tire, a type of
occupational or physical enrichment. But I'm sure that we can all recognize
that regardless of this enrichment, this environment is still totally
unsuitable for this animal. In this case, the environment has been
enriched with a log pile and a bowl, but still remains barren and is completely
unsuitable to meet the psychological and physical needs of this species. Enrichment comprises many
different categories and where practical a complex variety
enrichment categories should be applied. These categories include physical
enrichments, such as bedding material, branch work, burrows, nesting boxes,
pools, substrates, and appropriate vegetation. Occupational enrichment, these
are natural or non-natural objects that can be manipulated,
such as toys or traffic cones. Feeding enrichment, this is the provision
of food related activities, novel food items and devices,
or the scattering of food. Sensory enrichment,
the provision of novel or familiar scents, sounds,
visual, or tactile stimuli. >> [INAUDIBLE]. >> Cognitive enrichment,
items that present mental challenges, and engage the animal in
problem-solving often for a reward. >> [INAUDIBLE] >> And social enrichment,
provision of intra or interspecies social stimuli, training and
positive human-animal relationships. >> [INAUDIBLE]
>> For enrichment to be successful, we need to
consider what needs we are trying to meet. The Shape of Enrichment, an organization
dedicated to developing and delivering zoo animal enrichment and Disney's
Animal Kingdom have both developed strategic approaches to developing
goal-oriented enrichment programs. And I'd suggest that you
check out their websites. This is an example of
goal-orientated enrichment. This browse hanger was developed for
moloch gibbons to provide both cognitive enrichment, and
promote natural foraging behavior. Sometimes, an overly simplistic
approach can be taken towards goal orientated enrichment. A classic example is that of live feeding. Some people believe that providing
a domestic prey animal to a predator within a confined environment
supports the predator's natural behaviors. However, when we consider the various
complex stages of predation, including prey finding through olfactory
or visual activity, stalking and pouncing or striking, we can see that
actually the killing of a chicken by tiger does not offer
much of a cognitive or physical challenge, and
is unlikely to be particularly enriching. Even in the case of reptiles,
the provision of live prey simply only replicates the strike and the
constrict aspects of the hunting sequence. And these behaviors can easily be
provided for by offering warm, humanely killed carcasses,
which elicits the same responses in the predator without the negative
welfare experience for the prey animal. Attempts to provide predators with genuine
simulated hunting experiences are much more challenging. This lion rover was developed
by Mark Kingston Jones to mimic natural predatory behaviors
in a pride of captive lions. And whilst not perfect, it can be
controlled by the keepers to offer the lions enrichment based on prey
location, stalking, and chasing. The benefit of a goal-oriented enrichment
program is that it considers the needs of the individual, rather than taking
a scattergun approach to enrichment. Enrichment items are presented,
assessed, and reviewed to ensure they
are meeting the goal. In this example, we see two young bear cubs rescued from
the illegal wildlife trade in Vietnam, where they were destined for
bear farms as part of the bear bile trade. These young cubs have already
experienced much trauma, maternal separation, transport, and
significant human interactions. And so it is important the new
experiences provide positive learning opportunities for them. We can see in this video that Misty,
the female cub, is very confident and
curious to explore her new bubble bath. Her brother Rain, however,
is a little more anxious and quite startled to see his
sister looking so strange. By monitoring this interaction, we can
assess their individual behaviors and responses, and modify their enrichment to
ensure that it does not cause anxiety or stress, but
instead remains a source of pleasure and supports their environmental exploration. Positive human-animal
interactions can lead to improved public engagement and education. And improved welfare and enrichment supports a greater
range of natural animal behaviors. But offering our animals
a variety of opportunities, they can choose their
preferred activities. And this choice and control over their daily activities is
likely to result in improved welfare. At all times, it is important that we are aware of
how what we do may affect our animals.