Welcome to this week's session which
is all about assessing animal welfare. And in this session,
we'll be exploring the sorts of measurements that are used
by international scientist to try to understand the world from
an animal's point of view and how this information can be used in helping to
make good decisions about animal welfare. Firstly, let's recap,
we know that people's attitudes and beliefs, especially when firmly held,
will drive human behavior, this is certainly the case with attitudes
towards animals and their welfare. These have been shown to influence
people's perceptions of businesses, products, and even cultures. Think of the most recent issues
to affect the sale of meat, such as the horse meat scandal in Europe, leading to a marked reduction in
the purchase of beef products. Such is the power of public opinion, that some businesses involved in buying
meat for their supermarkets shelves or food outlets have been encouraged
to implement policy changes so that the products they sell have
the highest standards of animal welfare. Public opinion can also lead to changes
in legislation governing the way animals are housed. Such as with the banning of the so-called
battery cage housing systems for laying hens in Europe. However, people's opinions
are not always based on facts and attitudes can often be challenged
when good data is presented. It is for this reason that many animal
welfare organizations will use both the emotional as well as robust arguments
based on scientific evidence for lobbying businesses and governments for positive changes in
animal welfare policy and practice. As we learned during last week,
animal welfare is a complex subject and there are many, many different
opinions about animal welfare as well as differences in
understanding what it is. When asked, most people would be
able to provide examples of what they consider to be poor animal welfare. And in many cases these will include
cruel treatment of companion animals and with issues with the way
production animals may be kept. However, it's interesting that
finding examples of good or positive welfare seem far harder. Most people feel comfortable with
suggesting that a dog wags its tail when it's happy to see you, but
examples of happiness or pleasure in farm animals are less obvious. This is probably because we are more
likely to have known or owned a dog or cat and therefore feel more familiar
with their emotional expression. And it may also reflect a phenomenon
that has been termed speciesism where we see different levels of
consideration being given to animals as a consequence of their species rather
than any evidence of a difference in their ability to feel positive or
negative emotions. Using a scientific approach,
we can take out some of the subjectiveness that occurs when we base
decisions about animals and their welfare on our own beliefs and
our own opinions. Using an evidence approach and shows
that we make good use of measurements that have been developed to enable
a much more objective assessment of an animal's response to
the situation it finds itself in. Using the scientific method
means that a hypothesis or explanation is formulated
based on good observations. The measurements used to test this
hypothesis will need to be robust and the results subjected to statistical
analysis before a decision is made about whether there is good enough evidence for
or against a possible explanation. The process of experiment makes
me repeat it a number of times to check that the results are similar,
at which point a conclusion can be drawn. Scientists believe that this process
allows us to make more accurate judgements about how an animal is coping with
its environment or its situation. And move us much closer to understanding
the individual animal's experience, enabling us to make more
animal-centric decisions. There are a number of methods that are
used for measuring animal responses that are based upon the notion that
the animal's emotional response to the situation it finds itself in is
expressed through its physiology and behavior. For example, an animal experiencing fear
will, depending upon its species, try to rapidly remove itself either through
flight or hiding and may even be inclined to remove the thing that it is fearful of
through behaving aggressively towards it. The flight or fight behavior response is
associated with increased heart rate and blood pressure as well as
rises in various brain and blood chemicals all of
which can be measured. There are many examples of what
are called animal welfare indicators. Scientists are now extremely
good at measuring behavioral, physiological, and even immunological
responses to negative experiences, such as pain, fear, or stress. These emotional experiences
cause immediate responses, such as increased heart rate, as well as
longer term responses like behavioral changes, such as the repetitive
actions of a horse or a dog kept stabled or kenneled for
long periods of time. And if the animal is kept in this
negative state for long enough changes in the animal's ability to resist disease
will lead to health and growth problems. However, more recently there has been
an appreciation of the importance of discovering measures indicative
of positive emotional states. Social behavior such as play and
comfort behavior that occur during specific times such as the nest
building scene in pregnant sows. This has led to a deeper understanding
of the importance of different aspects of an animal's environment from birth or
hatching through early developmental experiences, to the way
an animal is grouped, housed, and transported in relation
to its quality of life. Through measuring changes in behavior and
physiology in a structured way, scientists are able to work out
the relationships between different types of housing, different
handling conditions, and transport. And look at the way animals normally
experience this, and how their responses will allow them to adapt to cope with the
challenges that this may impose upon them. By measuring animal welfare
through these indicators, we're in a much better position to
properly manage animal welfare needs. This helps us to work out what is positive
or negative from the animal's point of view which can be applied in
approving animal handling methods or environments and
ensuring higher standards of welfare.