I'm Alistair Lawrence. I have been working in this area for
a considerable period of time. I'm a Scot, born and
bred in a farm in Perthshire, which is about 50 miles short
of where we're standing here. And I went to St.
Andrews and studied zoology, and from there I came to Edinburgh and I was
introduced to a man called David Rudgosh, who was really the father of what we
think of as the animal welfare science. And he introduced me to the study of
animal behavior as a way of understanding animals' lives to understand
animals' perspectives and to try and put that into the context of,
for example, animal farming. Well in some senses we've made
almost unimaginable progress. One of the subjects I studied first
was the close confinement of sows which are pregnant, and that system
is now phased out int the UK and in the EU and is under question
in many other parts of the world as a result not entirely, but
largely as the result of science. And the way that science explored
the issues of what it meant to a sow to be kept in those sort of conditions. Another very early piece of work for
me was a rather similar question on sows which are giving birth,
referred to as farrowing sows. And they're also kept
in close confinement. And whilst that system
remains legal in the EU, research which we've done over quite
a long period of time, I have to say, is now progressively moving us
towards a position where I think that system will no longer be legal
in a relatively short period of time. The knowledge which we piece together,
and it literally is piece by piece, no single piece of research is the answer,
has just progressively lead firstly public opinion, to realize
that farm animals are no different, really, to the pets that they care for. Secondly, to the policymakers to
understand the public are very concerned about this. And lastly, and probably most importantly,
to get farmers and retailers and
those people who organize and control the supply chain of food to buy
into this idea that animal welfare is something that should be the cornerstone
of what we call livestock farming. >> [NOISE]
>> Well, next is interesting, because I just said I thought, and I do think,
that we have made this fantastic progress, and I should just say that that's not just
in terms of these phasing out of systems, but in all sorts of ways, including
global representation of the issues. It's just over ten years,
really, that that became, it was started by different organizations
beginning to take a global view, and now animal welfare
is really big worldwide. But whilst we've made these very
significant pieces of progress, at the same time, all sorts of other
things are beginning to impinge upon the production of food, in particular,
which may cause further issues to arise. And I'm thinking in particular
of food shortage and the need for livestock production to
become ever more efficient in order to supply this growing human population. The fact that in doing that we also
have to cater for energy shortage, water shortage, and
fertilizer shortage, and we've got to do that all within
the umbrella of climate change. All dictates that livestock
production in the future is going to be quite pressurized. And the past tells us that when
we pressurize and intensify agriculture in that way, that animals
can be the losers if we're not careful. So there's a very important point coming
up where we need to continue to emphasize the case for animals in this new
global food security argument.