Hi, and welcome to week six. Now this week is a new week
that we've added as a result of realizing that perhaps we hadn't properly
addressed some of the naughtier issues. That are associated with
the use of animals. And we decided that week six should
be a week that is not obligatory, there's no test or
quizzes involved with this. It's purely for
the interest of those people who would like to learn a little
bit more about the issues. And also the welfare research
that's associated with animals and their slaughter. And also the use of animals in research. Now we realized that there's quite a lot of ethical concerns
about the consumption of animals. And of course the process of
getting animals to slaughter. And also the use of animals in research. And some of those have come up all
ready in the discussion forums. What we do not want to do is
to enter into discussions about the ethical use of animals or
the consumption of animals. And we'll leave that for
you to decide and to discuss. What we do want to be able to do is to
provide you with some of the objective studies. Some of the studies that have looked
specifically at the welfare issues for these different species. Recognizing that there are many, many
millions of animals that are slaughtered. And that are used in research
every year throughout the world. What we do want to do is
give you a real flavor of the kind of research that's going on,
and there's a huge amount of research. And also of the different controls,
the different legislation and the different policies that govern
the use of animals in research. But also, try to improve standards for
animal welfare. I want you to enter into this
week with quite an open mind. There's some things that you will find,
I''m sure disturbing. We've tried to signpost those so that there's little bits of film that
we think you might find disturbing. We've given you choices about whether
you want to look at those films. And we want you to engage with
the material in the order that we've presented it. So that you can get a really good overview
of what we believe the welfare issues are. And the research that is being
done to address those issues. I hope that you find this week six
interesting, informative, and engaging. And I'm sure that at the end of it,
you will feel that you will be in a much better, stronger position
to make evidence-based arguments. About whatever your
ethical position might be. Thank you very much.