Hello, and welcome to
Companion Animal Behavior and Welfare. My name is Hayley, and I'm the welfare and
anesthesia veterinary nurse here at the Royal Dick School of Veterinary
Studies in Edinburgh in Scotland. This week we are going to be looking at
dogs and cats and also touch on rabbits and horses and the main welfare issues
that they face in today's modern society. Whether they are loved pets,
strays roaming the street, waiting in a shelter for
a new home or being raised for meat. These different categories of cats and dogs, will all be facing a different
set of welfare challenges. We are going to delve into what causes
them to have to face the main welfare issues of today. And the impacts that their
living conditions have on them. We'll look at what we know,
about how to improve dog and cat welfare. And what obstacles stand in
the way of improving their lives. It doesn't matter whether you own a pet or
not. Dogs and cats play an important
role in our society. And as sentient beings
it's up to us to try and understand how their experiences
impact their on their welfare. Dogs and cats were domesticated
thousands of years ago and since then they've become
an integral part of our lives. As much loved pets, as assistant animals,
as a food source in some countries, or simply as an animal in which
to share our streets with. Everybody knows that dogs and
cats are integral to modern society providing companionship, security and
nurturing experiences for many particularly the vulnerable and
isolated in our communities. The AVMA, American Veterinary
Medical Association, recognizes that the human-animal bond exists, and
that it has done for thousands of years. Most of you on this course will have
had a pet at some point in your life. And for the majority of you, it will have
been a rewarding, and positive experience. We know, from research, that owning an animal is believed to
have beneficial effects on human health. From a cardiovascular perspective, pet
ownership has been associated with higher levels of physical activity, lower blood
pressure, diminished responses to stress, and a reduced incidence or
severity of depression. In addition, studies have also shown
that pet ownership in patients with coronary artery disease improves
survival rates following a heart attack. So there's no doubt that we
benefit from pet ownership. But what about the animals? Do they benefit, or do they suffer? We're now going to take a look at
the welfare problems facing our cats and dogs of today. First of all, though,
we need to recognize that cats and dogs can be divided into
several different categories. And depending on what category the dog or
cat finds itself in. It's welfare problems it will be
facing will be very different. We can assume that most dogs and cats will
fall into one of the following categories. Pet, street or stray, shelter. Regardless of which category a dog or cat belongs to,
its welfare needs do not change at all. The following are the five welfare
demands not just for dogs and cats, but for all animals. Nutrition, appropriate consumption of nutritious food is
a pleasurable experience. Environmental. Benign conditions offer
adaptive choices and variety. [NOISE]
Health. Physically sound, uninjured,
disease-free animals enjoy good health. Behavior. Environment focused and inter-animal
activities are satisfying and engaging. Mental or Affective State. Animals experience comfort,
pleasure, interest and confidence. If we want to to talk about
the welfare problems that dogs and cats face, then we need to look at
them in their individual categories. Even though their needs do not change,
a dog or cat sitting in a barren shelter
environment, for example, will be facing a very different set of problems to
the pet dog or cat in our living room. You would be forgiven for thinking that
pet dogs and cats probably have the best life out of all the categories, but
they suffer from welfare problems too. Lack of mental stimulation,
and being left alone for long periods of time is a real problem for
our pet dogs of today. We have behavioral problems, such as separation anxiety,
aggression, destructive behavior. These are all very common. They are usually a symptom of there
being something wrong with the dog, and the behavior is the dog's way
of coping with the stress. Lack of exercise is also a problem, due
to owner's time constraints, priorities, and energy levels, and obesity is
on the increase due to overfeeding. This is often through guilt about
leaving the dog alone all day, and also a lack of exercise and
off-lead exercise. And finally, a lack of choice,
about anything. The owner decides where the dog sleeps. Who it plays with. When it is walked. Where it is walked. What it eats. Even if it can reproduce or not. Research has been done in the UK, to show that 35% of owners relinquishing
their dogs to rescue shelters. Do so because they do not have
enough time to spend with their dog. And a fervent 85% cited behavioral
problems as the reason for their relinquishment. According to a survey carried out in the
U.S., the top ten behavioral reasons for dogs and cats were. Number one, biting. Two, aggressive towards people. Three, escapes. Four, destructive inside. Five, destructive outside. Six, disobedient. Seven, problems between new pet and
other pets. Eight, aggressive toward other animals. Nine, soils the house. Ten, vocalizes too much. Unwanted behaviors are the reason
behind the death and relinquishment of more pets per year
than infectious diseases, tumors, and metabolic diseases combined all together. Now we're going to look at the welfare
problems facing the pet cat. Cats, especially indoor-only cats, suffer from a lack of stimulation,
a lack of exercise, and obesity. Cats have highly developed senses that are
used to stalk and kill small prey animals. When cats are confined to
the house 24 hours a day, these skills are unused in a sedentary,
unchanging environment. And there is for the cat to do to occupy it's time if
the owner does not interact with it. Research has shown that cats
have adapted well to being fed two to three times a day. But actually prefer
many small meals a day. This is difficult for the average
cat owner to achieve with work and family commitments. So ad lib feeding tends to be the answer,
with this leading to obesity in many cats. Stress as unusual as it may sound for
an animal that doesn't have to go to work, pay a mortgage, remember birthdays or
book a holiday. Is another factor compromising welfare for
our pet cats. Urinary tract infections or disease which require veterinary
intervention and treatment. Occur more often in indoor cats and multi-cat households than in outdoor and
single-cat households. Proximity to other cats, remembering that
cats [SOUND] are a selectively social species, highly stressful environments,
moving house, different people constantly coming and
going, and a lack of a sufficient number of litter trays for indoor cats
can all contribute to stress and the associated urinary tract infections. Behavioral problems in cats such
as scratching and spraying urine are normal behaviors and only considered
problems if the cat performs them indoors. And just like the pet dog, the pet cat,
especially the indoor pet cat has very little choice over
anything it experiences. This table here serves as a useful
comparison in welfare problems facing the indoor and outdoor pet cat. As we can see, there are pros and
cons for both categories. And owners need to consider these sensibly
when making the decision for their cat. Is boredom, obesity, or
inactivity a fair price for the cat to pay to prevent theft,
road traffic accidents, or being attacked? A major British charity, the PDSA,
the People's Dispensary for Sick Animals carried out it's seventh annual survey
in 2013, on over 2,000 pet owners, to track the well-being of the UK's pets, and to identify what needed to be
done to improve their welfare. They found the following. In 57% of cat-owning households the number of litter trays is
fewer than the number of cats. Only 5% of cat owners look
at body condition score and weight before deciding how much to feed. 90% of cat owners report their
cat is afraid of something. 41% of cats live in multi-cat households. The number of dogs having daily off
the lead exercise has decreased to 66%. Only 17% of dog owners look
at body condition score and weight before deciding how much to feed. 58% of dogs have never been to
training classes when they were young. The proportion of dogs left alone for
five hours or more on a regular basis has increased significantly from 18% to 25%. >> So whilst pet dogs and cats of today
can enjoy improved health, a longer life, and better nutrition, thanks to advances
in veterinary medicine and research, we still have a long way to go in making
their lives welfare problem free. We have to remember also that
it's these very advances can involve difficult decision whether
it's ethically acceptable to pursue or continue treatment just because we can. In some cases from
the animal's point of view, this may mean short term discomfort for
long term gain. For example, under going orthopedic treatment may mean
months of recovery in confined conditions. Which may lead to the exact welfare
problems we try so hard to avoid. We obviously can not explain
this to our pets and therefore we need to make sensible
decisions on their behalf. Later on, we'll be discussing what we can
do to improve the welfare of our pets. But now, let's look at the welfare
problems facing street dogs and cats.