My name is Cathy Dwyer. I lead a team of behavior and welfare
scientists at SIUC just outside Edinburg. My main area, I guess,
is I'm interested in how mothers and offspring interact with each other and
how that helps the offspring develop, but also how that helps them,
in terms of, their welfare. So we're interested in
the welfare of the mother, but also the welfare of the offspring and
how they develop. So the research that we do looks
at the animal from conception, or even a little bit before conception,
so we look at how the mother is managed very early on in her pregnancy,
all the way through her pregnancy. Then we look at how
the behavior of the mother and the behavior of the offspring
interact with each other, so that is really important for
the survival of the offspring. So that's one of the main
jobs that a mother does, is helps to keep her offspring alive,
but, as well as that, she also teaches her offspring about
what life is going to be like. There's lots of behaviors that we
tend to think of as just being something that the animal does
intrinsically that we now know that should have been taught to them by their mothers
and that's how they learned to be a successful animal whether it's a sheep,
or a pig, or a cow. And so we research all those different
stages, so we look at what happens in pregnancy and some of the different
ways we might manage the mother, and then we look at
the behavior of the mother, we look at how that alters
the behavior of the offspring, and how the offspring then copes and
develops into an adult animal itself. So, up until a few years ago,
we used to think that, I guess, really once an animal was born, that was
when it started to learn and develop, and that's when things happened to it
that might affects its welfare. But we now know a lot more about
what happens in development, so really, right from the point where the egg
is released and becomes fertilized, but even really before then. So, even before conception,
things that happened to the mother, and very recently we know also things that
happen to the father before he mates with the mother, can have an impact
on that developing embryo. Some of the ways that we look at that is
to manipulate the nutritional environment. We might do that by using
a process called embryo transfer, where we take an embryo
from one mother and we put it into the uterus to the womb of
another mother, and we look at how those things that might have happened to that
embryo in one mother, very early on. So the sort of nutritional
environment that that came from and how that affects how it develops when
that nutritional environment has changed because they're
now in a different mother. It may be the mother of
a different breed of animal. So we can look at whether early life
development is affected by the breed of the mother, or we may look at things like
different stressful events that we know happen in the lives of pregnant mothers. So we might look at how they're handled,
how they're housed, whether they're housed in large groups or small groups,
whether there's competition for food. All sorts of things that might
happen on a farm to a farm animal, and what does that mean for the offspring? [COUGH] Some of the indicators that we
might look at will be behavior, but we'll also look at the placenta. The placenta is the afterbirth, or the
organ that the mother communicates with the fetus through with help
develop the offspring through. So that regulates the amount of oxygen,
the amount of nutrition, and crucially, I guess, some of the hormones
that might reach the fetus. So stress hormones in the mother,
how they might reach the fetus, how they might affect the developing
brain, organs, and tissues of the fetus. We know that one of the targets for
early life development is the stress access, so the access that
we're concerned about from any welfare point of view is also affected by things
that happen in the mother before birth. We can see that is a permanent effect, so we can see that the things that happened
to the mother have a long lasting impact on how the offspring might
cope with a stressful event. One of the things that we think happens
when the mother is pregnant, and we do a lot of our work on sheep and
on pigs, so we look at things that might
normally happen to that mother. Either how she's housed, and,
in the case of a pig, if she's housed in a social group, where there might be
a lot of social interactions and fighting, things that might be quite unpleasant for
the mother. Or we might look at an animal that's kept
in an environment where she doesn't get a lot to eat, and
that's quite common in sheep, particularly in hill sheep in Scotland or
places where there's not a lot of nutrition where it would be very dry
if there's droughts during pregnancy. There may not be a lot of food. All the answers what might be happening. We do know, in terms of nutrition, that,
if the mother is undernourished in pregnancy, then that does have generally
a negative impact on her offspring, both in terms of its own growth,
its future reproductive status, and also its ability to learn
things that are important. So those animals have reduced survival,
the offspring do not survive as well. So that's a fairly important issue for the welfare of those offspring, that they
don't cope as well with the environment. When we think about the more
psychological stresses, how we manage those animals in terms
of how they interact with other animals in their social group, how they
interact with us as animal caregivers, then it's a little more difficult about
whether the mother's stress is transmitted to the offspring in a way that's going to
be negative for the offspring or positive. Some of the data we have suggests that
some things are bad for the offspring, so they may be more stress reactive, but there may be some things that might
be better for those offspring, and, at the moment, it's hard to say for
sure that these are always negative. There may be things that the mother is
trying to do to help her offspring cope better with the environment that
it's going to be born into and it's going to live in. I think what we're trying to do with this
work is to produce more concrete evidence of, what is the longer term impact? A lot of these studies are quite new, and quite often the study finishes at
a point where the animal is very young. Maybe it's a newborn animal, and we don't
yet know the long-term, maybe the lifetime consequences of the things that happen
during the animal's whole life, so we know little bits. We know little blocks of things that
might happen to the animal, but we don't know the total life consequence. In some of the other species,
like humans and rodents, we also know that some of these effects go
on for more than the current generation. So it may be that the grandmother is
having an impact on her grand-offspring, and I think that's really fascinating
to know just how long some of these challenges happen. How long are they affecting
the lives of our animals? At the moment, I think we're really
just starting in this area really to put together some of the behavior, the
physiology, perhaps some of the impacts on how the brain develops,
to understand what it really means for these animals for something to happen to
their mothers when they're pregnant or their grandmothers when
they were pregnant.