Hi and welcome to session one, which is
all about why animal welfare matters. There is absolutely no doubt
that animals are vital for human welfare, whether that's
because they share our homes and give us companionship and
huge enjoyment or whether they enable us to remain healthy through being
able to consume animal products or through medical advances only made
possible by their use and research. But why us humans undoubtedly
benefit from their use of animals, the question of what's in it for
them is an important one. This is especially relevant when
we consider the welfare of many of the animals who wouldn't be alive if it
were not for their utility value, and who rely on humans for their living
conditions, their basic needs, such as food and water, healthcare,
and of course their mental well being. In our society, we make a lot
of assumptions about animals and what we believe they need and feel. The welfare of animals is
often an emotive subject and most people will have their opinion
about how animals should be treated. >> Animal welfare, is making sure animals
eat healthily, live in a safe environment. And in order to make sure
the meat that I consume, and I feed to my family is off a decent. >> Animal stimulation, and making sure
that they are well cared for, they're loved, but they also have things to do and
occupy themselves or they become bored. >> Animal welfare is
being nice to animals and looking after them and
making sure they feel happy and safe. >> Animal welfare, to me, is for fighting
good living conditions for animals, but adequate food, shelter, and water. >> Animal welfare is
respect of animals and treating them how you
would like to be treated. >> Animal welfare, to me, is just about
treating the animals with respect. You're giving them the ultimate. And depending on the definite species. >> Animal welfare to me is making the
animals as comfortable as they can be so you're giving them free access to bedding,
water. Free from stress, pain, illness or
limit the illness and act on it quickly. So give her the best
environment you can give her, unless it [INAUDIBLE]
environment as it were. >> Animal welfare is often
quite controversial. With views that can be polarized and
at times extreme. But it's important that we recognize but it is these very attitudes that
influence human behavior and need to be understood, if we are to
tackle global animal welfare issues. For example, some people believe
that it is wrong to kill any animal. Others believe that animals should have
exactly the same legal rights as humans. And yet others consider animals
as only of value to humans because of their usefulness either in
medical research or for consumption. There are a number of different ethical
views on animals and their use. What is important to understand is
that these are personal views and they are not necessarily based
upon scientific evidence. Advocates for
animal rights will challenge others to consider the moral status
of animals in society. Are giving that animals should
have the same rights as humans. They are particularly vocal about the use
of animals in research and also as food. Famous moral philosophers who have
written extensively about this viewpoint include Tom Raegan and Peter Singer. Peter Singer has famously said. If possessing a higher
degree of intelligence does not entitle one human to use
another for his or her own ends, how can it entitle humans
to exploit non-humans? Those holding utilitarian view consider it
best to decide upon what is acceptable in terms of animal use by balancing the
amount of suffering you think an actual use may cause with a benefit that
will be gained by the majority. The most famous founder of utilitarianism
was a British philosopher, Jeremy Bentham. Who argued that concern for another beings welfare should not be
based upon their mental capabilities or their ability to talk, but on what we know
of their ability to feel and to suffer. Bentham famously said,
The question is not Can they reason?, nor Can they talk?, but Can they suffer? Interestingly, much of the international
animal welfare legislation that has been developed governing the use
of animals as food and for medical advances is based upon
justification that needs to be made using what is termed
a cost-benefit analysis. Animal welfare is certainly a subject
about which most people will have something to say. And their opinions are often firmly
held and in most cases based upon their beliefs, their culture, and traditions
rather than on factual evidence. >> My name is Jill MacKay and
I'm an animal behavior and welfare researcher with a particular
interest in the human animal bond and how we talk about animal
welfare in general. I think some of the most interesting
cultural differences that we think about with animal welfare are probably
best exemplified with the dogs. What's important to remember that
regardless of what the culture is looking at the dog, what the use of the dog is
within that particular culture or society. What really matters for the dogs welfare
is how the dog is perceiving the world. What's it feeling,
what sort of sensations is it perceiving. And really what's going on
through that dog's eyes? What's happening in that
dog's particular mind. So from that point of view, the welfare needs of the dog regardless
of whether it's a companion animal, a beloved pet, an animal used in
clinical trials, or even a mixed dog. Its needs are very, very similar all
across those different categories. So, the culture may look
at things differently, but the welfare needs of
the dogs don't change. >> The advantage of using
a scientific approach for discussing issues related to animal
welfare, is that this provides a far more effective way of making decisions about
animals and what matters to them. By taking the emotion out of the argument,
and by using evidence gained from rigorous
studies of animals and their responses to environmental challenges, we can be
more confident that we're providing a view of the world that better reflects a
situation from the animal's point of view. We cannot escape from the fact that
much of the animal welfare issues are experienced by our farm animals. There are now set to be more than
60 billion land animals raised for meat and other products each year
around the world and with the number of people on our planet set to rise
to more than nine billion by 2050, alongside huge increases in meat
consumption in places like China and India, there is an increasing need for
more and more animal products. This will inevitably lead to increasing
numbers of animals being kept in intensively managed environments to
guarantee affordable animal products. But the problems are not
just confined to livestock, because increases in the human
population also often means more dogs. Worldwide there are an estimated 500
million stray or free roaming dogs. The lack of consistent implementation
of effective and humane methods for controlling the breeding of dogs has led
to increasing numbers leading to serious concerns over public health issues like
rabies and other zoonotic diseases. Sadly, this is all too frequently
resulted in knee jerk reactions such as the use of cruel practices to
try to rid areas of unwanted dogs. Most people, particularly in countries
where pet ownership is common, find this sort of response unacceptable. An international concern for
animal welfare continues to grow with rising demands from
influential organizations such as the World Animal Health Organization as
well as major animal welfare charities for the urgent adoption of measures
to protect animals and improve their care and well-being. Alongside this is a growing appreciation
of the link between animal welfare and human well-being. And the recognition that animals
have needs and feelings. And that these should matter
in a civilized society. Animal welfare has been described
as a complex, multi-faceted, public policy issue that includes
important scientific, ethical, economic and political dimensions,. Due to gaining importance internationally,
there is a increase in recognition of the need for animal welfare issues
to be addressed objectively, in a scientifically credible manner. Understanding what animal welfare is and
how it can be assessed in different species and
across a range of environments. And what can be done to achieve
high welfare is therefore a key international priority and something
we will be exploring more in depth as we move through the next
few weeks of this course.