My name is Jill MacKay, and
I'm an animal behavior and welfare researcher with a particular
interest in the human-animal bond and how we talk about animal
welfare in general. I think some of the most interesting
cultural differences that we think about with animal welfare are probably
best exemplified with the dogs. So in western cultures, we typically
think of dog being man's best friend. And they are the faithful pet who waits
for us when we come home from school. However, this is not a global view. If you think about areas where
there are lots of feral dogs, they become a bit of a public health risk. Particularly for they carry lots
of diseases such as rabies, which makes the dogs very aggressive. And they can actually
fatally attack people which makes them really dangerous
from a public health perspective. And dogs become something to be feared. And this happens particularly
in some regions in India and some countries in Africa. And that's very different from
the way we perceive them in the west. And if you move further east to China,
well dogs there, they become a product for meat. And yet in China they also have
companion animal dogs as pets as well. Much like the way, in Europe, we will have
horses bred for meat and yet horses for companion animals. So dogs serve a dual role there. But when you come back to the west and
the western culture, even though we have this idea of dogs
being man's best friend, we also use them in industry and in pharmaceutical
testing and in clinical trials. So they serve a multitude
of different purposes. And although they're just one species and
we've got a long history with them within humanity, we have many different
cultural viewpoints on them and they serve a wide variety of roles. Well, it's important to remember that
regardless of what the culture is looking at the dog, what the use of the dog
is within that particular culture or society, what really matters for the dog's welfare is how the dog is
perceiving the world, what's it feeling? What sensations is it perceiving? And really what's going on
through that dogs eyes? What's happening in that's
dog particular mind? So from that point of view, the welfare needs of a dog regardless
of whether it's a companion animal, a beloved pet, an animal used in
clinical trials or even a meat dog. Its needs are very, very similar all
across those different categories. So the culture may look at
things differently, but the welfare needs of
the dogs don't change. International standards for
animal welfare is absolutely possible, even across all these different
cultures that we've been talking about. But the only way to do that is to have
a common language and a common standard. And the way for that, is to have scientifically backed
evidence behind what we're saying. It's all very well for us to say that,
oh, we think of a dog as a pet. But, unless we have the scientific
evidence that dos like human companionship,
which in fact they do, it doesn't matter. So what we have to do, is pervade that
scientific evidence, pervade that way of talking about animal welfare,
in a scientific and objective manner. And then we can have an international
standard of animal welfare.