Hello, and welcome to SRUC's Dairy
Research Center, here in Dumfries, Scotland. Today we're gonna talk to you about
dairy farms and dairy cow welfare. We're gonna go through
how cows are farmed, how we make cows into productive animals. And hopefully by the end of this lecture
you'll understand where the welfare challenges are for cows, and maybe some
solutions to improve the situation. We're gonna focus on the welfare of the
cows here in this farm in Scotland today. But it's basically the same system that
you would see elsewhere in Europe and also in North America. Elsewhere in the world, these types
of systems are becoming more common. And the welfare problems that we see on
farm will be replicated wherever you go. The cows we have on farm here
are the black and white, large black and white Holstein Friesian breed. And these cows are the most popular
milking cow in the world today, particularly in North America and
in Europe. They are become more popular
elsewhere in the world, and we'll come back that a wee bit later too. I wanna talk a lot about the research
that underpins the evidence that there are welfare challenges these dairy
cows have to face from day to day. But you can find the references to
this in your Coursera course page, if you want to go in a bit
more detail later on. Other than that, let's go round
the farm and see how these cows live, see if we can find any well
fair solutions to problems. And also I hope you find this lecture
interesting, informative, and it brings up lots of questions for you
to ask on the discussion board, and for me to hopefully answer on the Google
Hangouts at the end of the week. This is the accommodation for our milking
cows here at the Dairy Research Center. There are places here for
the animals to lie down, comfortable bedding, there are places for
the animals to socially interact. And there's also places for
the animals to eat and drink. Let's start at the feed face, shall we? Cows have access to a feed face
where they can eat silage, which is conserved grass or other forages. And concentrate foods, which are mixed
together to form a total mix ration. When new food is put down here,
cows usually come to feed all at once. Most farms try to ensure there's enough
space for all the cows to feed at once. Cows are hierarchical animals, and dominant animals will
displace subordinate ones. Research has shown that cows will carry
out fewer aggressive interactions at the feed face where they're
in individual head spaces rather than feed faces like this one. Where the cows could easily
push each other out of the way. However, as you can see here now, we don't
have that many cows at this feed face, so there's plenty of space for
them all to feed together. Easy access to fresh clean water
is vital for dairy cattle. High yielding cows,
such as these Holsteins on our farm, need over 100 liters a day, and
more when the temperatures get hotter. Many people underestimate how much
a cow can drink at any one time. As our farm is set up for
research, we have both feeders and drinkers that can measure
the individual intakes. If we watch this cow we can see how many
liters of water she can drink in a very short space of time. Cows are provided with beds
called cubicles or free stalls. These cubicles are large enough for cows
to stand comfortably with all four feet on the bed and also to lie down comfortably
in a variety of different postures. They maintain hygiene
because the feces and the urine go out the back
into the passageway. Farmers will bed their cubicles or
free stalls like these ones, with mats or mattresses, and
then provide additional bedding. We've got here some sawdust that
keeps the cows comfortable. In different places of the world,
cubicles or free stalls are bedded with sand, straw. They may also be bedded with rice husks. Research has shown that cows,
understandably, like their bedding to be
dry rather than damp. And that they prefer sand
over other bedding types. If cubicles are not bedded well,
then animals can get rubs or swellings on their hocks and their knees. And we'll have little bit more of
a look at that in the parlor later. If cubicles are not comfortable,
then cows can get lame and we'll again, we'll talk a little bit
more about that later too. Cows spend a lot of the day lying down. They ruminate or chew their cud for
longer when they don't lie down. Cows are extremely motivated to
lie down somewhere comfortable. If cubicles or
free stalls are not comfortable enough, cows will sometimes lie down in
the passageways, getting very mucky. Cows that are not comfortable will
also spend more time standing or perching in their cubicles or passageways. This can lead to an increased
likelihood of lameness. Being out at pasture gives cows
the opportunity to lie down comfortably in whatever posture they wish and
on their own or in groups. However, this exposes them
to weather conditions and can lead to disease transfer
in overstocked fields. Research has also shown that cattle will
choose fields for lying down and not for grazing when food is
provided in main shed. We could conclude that
in an ideal situation, cows would be given the choice of
where they're able to lie down, having access to fields
when they want to use them. However this is not always practical for
many farms, and almost impossible here on
our farm during the winter. Therefore, we have to
ensure that the inside accommodation is as good as possible. If you were to ask any dairy farmer
here in the UK what the three biggest welfare challenges were for
their cows, he or she would almost undoubtedly answer
infertility, lameness, and mastitis. Infertility is not necessarily
a welfare concern to the cow, because it doesn't really
necessarily affect her welfare. But it's usually brought on by, indirectly
or directly, related to other welfare problems such as lameness and mastitis,
along with a host of other problems. If we were to ask the same question
to farmers in North America or in the rest of Europe, you'd find that
they would answer very similarly. If we were to ask that question
to farmers in Asia or in Africa, they might answer slightly differently, mainly because lameness is not such
an issue in the these countries. We're gonna now look at some cows that
have mastitis here in the parlor and also carry out some mobility scoring
to see if we can score lameness. Mastitis is the biggest infectious
disease problem for dairy cattle. It's an infection of the udder, and
causes inflammation, pain and can, in extreme cases, lead to death. Dairy cattle usually catch mastitis
from lying in dirty conditions or from poorly cleaned milking equipment. Cows can be treated using antibiotics. During treatment, the milk is withdrawn
from the human food chain and is either thrown away,
as it is here, or given to calves. Cows such as this one
are marked with tape so that all the stock people know that
the milk is not to go into the main tank. There are big penalties against farmers
who allow treated milk into the bulk tank so withdrawal periods
are strictly adhered to. Mastitis is a painful condition for
the cow but it is, on the whole, treated properly and
thoroughly by farmers. Lameness is the other big health
issue that cows face in dairy farms. Lameness is where a cow does not
walk evenly on all four feet and in severe cases,
cows can barely walk at all. Lameness is due to the cow feeling
pain in her feet or her legs. This pain can come from an infectious
condition, a non-infectious bruising or hemorrhaging in the hoof, or
some other injury to the foot or the leg. Lameness is not caused by one disease or
environmental conditions but is multifactorial. Lameness is more common in the first
few weeks after calving and can be related to cows standing
in wet conditions or slurry. Or can be related to poor levels
of comfort in the bedded areas. Lameness can be reduced by keeping
cows' feet clean and dry, increasing cow comfort in the bedding area, and
using footbaths such as this one. Foot trimming can also help to
alleviate non-infectious lameness and should be done regularly. We know from research that each case of
lameness costs a considerable amount of money, around about 200
pounds in UK terms. And this is lost through lowered
milk yield and lowered fertility. This knowledge should help farmers to
treat this condition more frequently. Cows can be assessed for
many things when they're in the parlor. They have easy access to the cow's legs. And we can see all the way down to
the hoof, as well as to the udder. You can see here that this
cow has an abrasion and a swelling on its hock
from long-term housing. We can also see that the hoof shape is
around about the right angle there. We can measure other things
in the parlor as well, and I'll show you some
mobility scoring later on. And that's what we do when we're measuring
for lameness when cows leave the parlor. But otherwise, I think this girl is
finished milking, so we'll let her leave. Okay, so this is a good place to do
mobility scoring, where we look for lameness and how well a cow
puts its weight onto each foot. I'm just gonna let the cows out now and
then I'll carry out a mobility score. And this way, any cows that are lame can
be separated from the herd and treated. Many retailers and farm assurance
schemes are putting in mobility scoring as a requirement these days,
which should help in treating this often untreated or
poorly treated condition. This cow is having trouble putting
weight evenly on all four, and she can go through and
be shed from the main herd.