This week we're going to be
looking at the welfare and behavior of wild animals
kept under human care. For simplicity, we'll refer to
this as wild animals in captivity. And this is to distinguish them from
free-ranging wild animals who would live in their natural habitat. Wild animals are not domesticated. They haven't been changed genetically
in order to benefit humans. And so animals that are maintained in
captivity, in situations such as zoos, safari parks, circuses or sanctuaries,
retain many of their wild characteristics, and genetically are essentially
similar to their wild counterparts. We may tame wild animals in captivity
in many different situations. We might have different ethical viewpoints
about each of those situations, as to whether we approve or
disapprove of them. Those situations may include
institutions such as zoos, sanctuaries, circuses, or safari parks. We may make different value judgments
about the validity of each of those captive situations. But its important to remember that animal
welfare occurs across the spectrum. And whilst we may hold different moral
viewpoints about the validity of each of those institutions, what matters
is the experience of the animal. So it's important that we
put our biases aside and we look at the welfare of the individual
animals housed within those institutions. We may have good or bad zoos, good or bad
safari parks, and good or bad sanctuaries. And it's important that we judge
them on their individual merits and on the animal's experience
rather than on our own biases. It's important to recognize
our own limitations. Even if we're very experienced or well trained,
there's always more that we could do. In 2009, Melfi identified three
primary gaps in our knowledge and approach to zoo animal welfare. These are, number one, a focus on
identifying indicators of poor welfare, and an assumption that a lack of poor
welfare is equivalent to good welfare. Number two,
our understanding of how housing and husbandry affects animal welfare
is limited to a few variables, based on our own
anthropogenic interpretation. And number three, our knowledge and efforts to improve animal welfare
are limited to relatively few taxa. In addition, she suggests that these
problems are exacerbated by a reliance on method and tradition to decide how
zoo animals should be managed. But what does this mean in the real world? And are these challenges
limited just to zoos? I would suggest that all facilities
housing captive wild animals could improve the welfare of their animals
by considering these points. Let's look at them in
a little more detail. So, the first gap we'll talk about is the
assumption that a lack of poor welfare is equivalent to good welfare. A framework that is commonly used to
assess welfare is The Five Freedoms, which I'm sure that you're familiar with. However, it is important to recognize that
this framework was developed in 1965 for intensively rare livestock. I'm sure that those of us who work with
wild animals in any capacity would aspire to achieve a higher level of
welfare than what this describes. If we look at the five freedoms,
we can see that they confer protection or freedom from a variety
a negative welfare situations. However, they don't actively
support good welfare, but instead, protect against negative welfare or
suffering. More recently, David Miller, a welfare
scientist working in New Zealand, has developed the five welfare domains. These are an adaptation of the five
freedoms that place the emphasis on providing animals with enjoyable and
positive experiences. Recognizing that it is our basic duty
as caretakers to fulfill the five freedoms and that really,
we should be striving for much more. And our animals should be
experiencing positive physical and emotional experiences in
order to insure good welfare. The second point is that our
understanding of how housing and husbandry affects animal welfare is
biased by our human perspective. One of the criticisms often
level the animal welfarist, is that of anthropomorphism. Yet if we look at any animal husbandry
situation; we can see that this is often something we're all guilty of. It is common in zoos in may
parts of the world to keep animals that are not native
to that region and this can sometimes post significant welfare
challenges in terms of thermoregulation. As is the case for
polar bears in hot climates. Alternatively, a concern that
animals may get too cold in locations that have severe winters may
result in animals being locked away for many months because we
think it's better for them. These are decisions that we make
based on our own perspective. An alternative approach would be
to provide animals with a choice. If it's cold outdoors, offer a heated indoor space which the
animal may choose to use if it prefers. If it's hot outside,
offer a cool indoor climate, but don't force the animal
only into one space. We need to understand things
from the animals perspective and provide them with choices and
opportunities. Changes in weather, daylight,
ventilation, or factory stimulation and visual stimulation provide important
enrichment for many species. And for species like primates, birds, and reptiles, access to appropriate
ultra-violet light is essential. It is important that we don't look
at an animal's husbandry from a human perspective, but more from the
perspective of what that species needs. [SOUND] Similarly,
we have traditionally built hygienic enclosures that meet our
requirements in terms of cleaning. But which do not provide for the psychological needs of the animals
they're designed to house. In more progressive zoo's, many of these traditional enclosures
have been redeveloped or modified as we recognize that animals have very different
behavioral priorities to people. Understanding animal behavior
is a vital component to providing appropriate housing and
husbandry. It is important to remember, that for
many species the expression of these behaviors has conferred evolutionary
success over generations and so is driven to promote the success and
survival of the species. The animal can not always modify it's
behavior to suit the captive environment. It is up to us to provide
an appropriate environment for the animals we choose to house. A good example is that
of elephant housing. Traditionally, we have housed
elephants in environments that may not accommodate all of
their natural behaviors. Often in groups of unrelated individuals,
with relatively fragile social structures that are disrupted by transfers, breeding
priorities, and space constraints. All of which challenge
the welfare of the individuals. In this video, we can see a female
elephant giving birth on a concrete floor. The birthing fluids create a slippery and
potentially dangerous environment for her. The kicking behavior shown by this female
elephant giving birth on concrete could be dangerous for the calf. And has lead to many female
elephants being isolated and sometimes chained during labor, as this behavior was misinterpreted as
an act of aggression towards the calf. This behavior simply does not make sense
in this human designed environment. However, if we change the environment
to consider how elephants have evolved, we can see that this behavior
actually does make sense, but only on a natural flooring. The kicking creates a dip in the sand
to allow the young elephant to get his legs beneath him,
and to stand quickly. This is essential for suckling and in
order to allow him to move with the herd. The kicking of sand also absorbs
the birthing fluids, reducing odors and minimizing the risk of predation
of the newborn elephant calf. This behavior would confer
success in a wild environment. It is essential that if we
are to deliver good welfare, we consider the impacts of the decisions
we make, relating to housing and husbandry from the perspective
of the animals themselves. The third gap identified
is that our knowledge and efforts to improve zoo animal welfare
are limited to relatively few taxer. Research has shown that we are generally
more concerned about charismatic, aesthetically pleasing species. But the reality is, that these species are the minority
of the species that many zoos house. Fish, reptiles, invertebrates, and birds make up the vast majority of species
housed in zoos and by private collectors. In many cases, such species may have
additional welfare concerns as they're often caught from the wild and traded over
long distances to supply consumers in the zoo, aquarium, and pet trade. The marine aquarium trade, for example, is almost entirely
reliant on wild caught specimens. And Traffic,
the wildlife monitoring network, records many cases of illegal export of
a great variety of wild caught animals. A recently published study by Ashley,
et al., described the seizure of invertebrates,
amphibians, reptiles and mammals at a major USA wholesaler. And states that 80% of the animals in
the seizure were found to be sick, injured or dead. Such trading to supply captive industries
raises a plethora of both welfare and conservation concerns. For some pet owners,
their ability to provide good welfare for a pet corn snake or a pet gold fish
may actually exceed their ability to provide for the welfare needs of more
traditional pets such as dogs or rabbits. And so
when we're looking at pet ownership, it is important that we consider
the specific needs of a particular species when we consider it's suitability as
a pet for a particular lifestyle. Finally, we have the assertion that these
problems are exacerbated by a reliance on myth and tradition to decide how
zoo animals should be managed. This sounds perhaps a little critical. And this is important to
emphasize again that a lot of these challenges are not
unique to zoos and aquaria. Exotic pet owners,
sanctuaries, safari parks and circuses will also recognize
many of these challenges. What is important is that we do
recognize these challenges regardless of the industry that we work in and
that we collaborate in order to continually improve
the welfare of our animals. Scientific research can guide us in making
decisions about what is acceptable in how we keep the animals that
we manage in captivity. For example, research over many years has
demonstrated that fish may feel pain in a way that is similar to mammals,
and will avoid painful stimuli. More recent research has shown that
crustaceans may also feel pain, and potentially even emotional
states such as anxiety. So now that we have a greater
understanding of the potential capacity of these species to suffer, should we consider further where we
acquire them from and how we house them. The precautionary principle
confers responsibility on us to safeguard the welfare of these
species that we choose to keep, even if we don't have complete
evidence of their capacity to suffer. But in species that are so
dissimilar from our own, how can we effectively recognize these welfare
problems before they become significant? Research has changed how we house,
feed, and care for exotic animals. And it is important that animal
caretakers, scientists, and animal welfarists collaborate in order
to provide the best possible care for the animals that we manage. For example,
whilst we may work nine to five or eight till six, our animals have a 24
hour experience of their enclosure, their enrichment, and
their access to food. And so they need opportunities and
choices throughout the 24 hour period. We understand now that mate choice
can have a significant impact on reproductive rates, neonatal survival,
and litter size in some species. And that successful captive breeding must
consider the animal's requirements for choice, as well as an appropriate
environment and social structure. By recognizing that our perception of
what animals need is biased by our human agenda and by what we've always
done, we can challenge these biases and traditions and
focus instead on what the animal needs.