Hello we're the animal behaviour and
welfare team and we're really delighted that you'll be
spending the next five weeks with us whilst we
understand a little bit more about animal behaviour
and welfare and applications of science in the
real world. And I'd like to introduce you to the team that you'll be working with over the next
five weeks. So I'll start with me. I'm Professor Nat Warren, and I'm the
Director of the Jeanne Marchig Animal Welfare Centre at the
University of Edinburgh. Hi everyone, my name's Heather and I'm a
veterinary surgeon, here at the University of Edinburgh's Jeanne Marchig International Centre for Animal
Welfare Education. Most of my work is focused overseas where
I work in developing countries, primarily Asia but also Eastern Europe and
Africa. We are very fortunate to be able to have a
wealth of experience from around the world to
contribute to some of the educational resources that we've
developed here at Edinburgh and I hope that you find those useful as we go
through the course. I'll be seeing you in week five where
we'll be talking about the welfare of wild animals kept
under human care in captivity. My name is Dr Fritha Langford and
I'm the Program Director of our online Masters program in International Animal
Welfare Ethics and Law here at the University of
Edinburgh. I'm also a researcher in animal welfare
science at Scotland's Rural College. And in my week which is farm animal
welfare myself and my colleagues will be helping you understand
about animal welfare on the farm. Hello, my name is Hayley and I'm the
welfare and anesthesia veterinary nurse at the Royal Dick school of Veterinary Studies here in
Edinburgh. I divide my time between anesthesia in the
hospital for small animals and also teaching overseas in developing countries
for the Jeanne Marchig International Centre for
Animal Welfare Education. I will be with you for the companion animal
welfare chapter, where we'll be looking at the welfare
problems facing our pet cats and dogs, and also shelter cats and dogs, and
street or stray cats and dogs. My name is Dr Jill Mackay and I also
work for Scotland's Royal College where I am an animal behaviour and welfare
researcher. My research interest include animal
personality which is what I did my PhD in, and I'm also really passionate about
public engagement with science and really communicating science to as
many different audiences as possible. To that end you will see me in some of the lectures particularly when we are
talking about assessing animal welfare. But I was also involved in designing a lot of the interactive sessions which you
will use and you'll see me a lot in the forums. We really hope that you enjoy the
course and also that you enjoy meeting some of
the animals that share our lives. So i'll let Hayley and Heather introduce
some of our pets. I'm really happy to introduce my two
dogs. This is Muthie. She is a street dog from Thailand and she was seized on the border between Thailand
and Laos. En route to Vietnam where she might be used
in the meat trade. And this is Matilda. Matilda is from China, a place where I
used to live and where I have lots of experience with
animal welfare issues. I'm very glad that they could both join me
here in Edinburgh and I certainly think they're
enjoying the sunshine here today. And I'd also like to introduce you to Stewart who you will see during my
chapter. He is from Thailand like Muthie and he was intercepted between the border of
Thailand and Laos with 3000 other dogs, making his way to
Vietnam to be part of the illegal dog meat trade. And finally, I want to introduce you to
Edinburgh. Look at it. Beautiful and you're very lucky that we
found one of the best days to be able to be up on this hill showing you exactly
why we love this city so much and we hope that this is going to inspire
some of you, to want to come and visit us here, and if you do make sure you come and pop by and meet us all in person.