The most obvious animal responses to
challenges in their life are behavioral. This can be very useful because it allows
scientists to have a non-invasive way for measuring welfare. But it can also lead to problems because
it's too accessible and therefore easy for us to interpret what we see as if this
were the same as human responses. This is called anthropomorphism, and it's a problem because ascribing
human qualities to animals can lead to misinterpretation of what
is really going on for that animal. For example, many people believe their
pets can feel guilty because they react as a human would if they were
caught doing something they shouldn't be. And some people believe their
animals know what they're thinking. In reality there really is no evidence
that animals think and react as we do. And since they have their own
species specific responses, it is far better if we do not impose
our beliefs and feelings on them. We must strive to try to understand
the world from their perspective. Scientists have developed a variety
of more objective methods for measuring animal behavior from simply
recording what they observe in a standardized way, to more elaborate
psychological tests designed to ask animals about how they feel
about their life experiences. A relatively simple approach used
in animal welfare assessment is to watch the animals in
their home environment, and then make a list of
the behaviors that they perform. This behavioral list called an ethogram provides a detailed
description of each behavior. Building an ethogram ensures that the
distinctive appearance of each behavior when performed can be easily recognized
by any person observing that species. By standardizing the list of behaviors
we're interested in observing, we can be sure that they're
clearly described, and can be accurately recorded in a way that can be
repeated by anyone in future studies. Behaviors listed in the ethogram can then
be observed, and the number of times and how long the animal performs them
can be recorded during a set period. And this behavioral record can be compared
across treatments or environments. Using this methodology, researchers
have been able to measure differences in the frequencies of specific activities
in animals in different living conditions. For example, we know that horses spend
around 16 hours a day moving around and grazing, when they're kept out in
a paddock, as compared with a fraction of that time when kept in more
restricted stables or stalls. Observations of animals in natural
environments can provide us with a lot of good information about key
behaviors different species perform when provided with the right
environmental stimulation. Around 30 years ago,
here in the hills south of Edinburgh, the late Professor David Wood-Gush and
his students released domesticated white pigs into a natural reserve, where they
lived and bred for a number of years. Through intensive field observations,
Professor Wood-Gush was able to convince the pig industry of the essential
behaviors pigs needed to perform, such as rooting using their sensitive
snouts, and being able to build nests for sleeping in, and for giving birth. It's hard to believe that
most pig producers then had only ever seen pigs being kept inside. And the pictures of sows carrying grass
to build nests gave them an insight into the secret life of pigs and the fact
that they had lost none of their important species specific behavior as
a result of domestication. But do these sorts of studies
provide us with enough information about the animals' needs? One of the limitations with just
using the observation method is that it only tells us what
animals do in different environments without helping us to understand
what these mean to the animal. Without digging deeper, all we know
is that the behavior is different, depending on environment, and different environments will provide
different behavioral opportunities. If we are to be able to make accurate
assessments about animal welfare, we need to go much further
into the animal's mind. Animal based measures involve giving the
animals the opportunity to make choices that enable us to work out what they
prefer and what they actively avoid. The idea behind choice or
preference test is simple, when faced with a choice between two or
more situations or resources, which one will an animal move towards most
frequently,or spend the most time with. The assumption behind the test is that
the animals will actively approach and stay with things they want or like, and will avoid those things
they find unpleasant or undesirable. The choice testing
approach can be used for looking at what animals actively avoid. Aversion tests are used to work out
what an animal finds unpleasant, once it has had experience of two
different types of handling or management. Animals will be placed in a start box and
then released, so they can move down a race or a passageway,
to where a specific type of handling or treatment was carried out previously. Their behavioral responses as they move
along the passageway are measured and used to infer how they might be feeling
about their previous experiences. A nice example of this approach is in some
work carried out by Professor Jeff Rushen and his colleagues in Canada, who measured
how much time was needed to push or drive sheep along a passageway to where
they had previously experienced shearing. They then compared this with the time
needed to push or drive those sheep after they had experienced nothing,
or had just been restrained. As can be seen here,
sheep were far more reluctant to go back towards a place where shearing had been
experienced, and this was measurable. Choice testing has been used to explore
many examples of animal preferences. It has been used extensively for examining
the choices made by hens in relation to aspects of the caged housing systems where
hens laying eggs are intensively managed. For example, researchers have looked at
whether hens will choose to be in a pen or a run with bedding, or
one with a concrete or bare floor. In addition, researchers have investigated
where the hens prefer to have a nesting box for laying their eggs, or
an open cage with a wire floor. It was research such as this that led to
the development of modified caging with perches and laying boxes as well as
dust baths since it was clear that hens, when given the chance to choose, would pick these as preferred
parts of their environment. However, this is only part of the story. Since although hens and
other animals will make choices, they are limited by the options that
are offered by the experimenter. We really do not know whether these
are exactly what the animal wants, nor whether the animal suffers if it
cannot have the preferred option. And we know that the animals
responses will vary according to developmental experiences, environmental
factors such as temperature, and internal factors such as age, sex or even
in hens, whether an egg needs to be laid. This is where motivational
testing comes in. The consumer demand approach to assessing
animal welfare was derived from economic studies where human motivation
for different resources is used to help understand how willing a person
is to pay for a particular commodity. In studies of animal welfare, animals are
placed in an enclosure where there is some sort of device they need to learn to
operate to be able to make active choices. Willingness to pay is assessed
through setting the animal tasks that will require certain
set of behaviors or a behavior response to be carried
out in order to get a resource. The work the animal is prepared
to do to acquire resource is measured in various ways. For example, hens have been trained to
push through swing doors that are weighted so that if the hen wants to get to
resources such as more space, a dust bath, or a nest box, it has to push
through increasingly heavy weights, to get to them. In other studies, the animal is trained
that it has to push a panel with its nose multiple times to get what it wants. The weight pushed through, or the number
of panel pushes is described as the price the animal is willing to pay to
buy access to the commodity. These studies have allowed researchers
to determine what is really important to animals, enabling them to provide
robust information that can be used by policy makers, animal industries and
animal organizations. The various methods developed for measuring animal behavioral responses to
different experimental testing protocols, have enabled scientists to move much
closer to being able to understand how strongly an animal feels
about a given situation. And this information,
along with that gained from measures made of the animal's physiological
responses, can provide a much, much more holistic view of the world
from the animal's point of view.