Welcome to Session Two,
which is all about what animal welfare is. The term animal welfare is being
used increasingly by businesses, consumers, veterinarians, and politicians. However, it can mean different
things to different people. In fact, in some parts of the world, animal welfare has no
meaningful translation. Interestingly, animal
welfare is no more or less difficult to define
than human welfare. I cannot assume that what I believe
to be a state of happiness in me is the same as for my friends and
for my colleagues. In general, for most humans we would
say that enjoying good welfare means that we're in good health, have
good wealth, and have freedom of choice. We could assume of course that animal
welfare is somewhat similar with different definitions of animal welfare emphasizing
different aspects of a bigger picture. It seems that animal welfare will be
defined in a way that is meaningful in terms of the way the animal is used,
the way it is viewed in society, and the interests and purpose of
the person who is doing the defining. For example, veterinarians and farmers
have tended to judge animal welfare chiefly in terms of animal health and
the physical environment. When assessments are made using only
one dimension of an animal's welfare, there is of course the risk that not
all animal needs are catered for. There is also the problem that
there are differences in opinion in relation to what is acceptable. There's no doubt that many animal
livestock producers will hold views about what are acceptable animal welfare
standards that may differ from advocates for less intensive, more naturalistic
housing systems for livestock. And this can often lead to tensions. These differences are also seen in
the scientific definitions of welfare, with some emphasizing
the physical well-being. Some more about natural lifestyles, and others focusing on the animal's
psychological state. In order to be able to
properly assess welfare, we need to be able to agree on what it is. And most agree that animal
welfare is a state or condition that changes depending
on the animal's experience and its ability to deal with the challenges
it may face at any given time. In fact, Donald Broom has defined
animal welfare as the state of an animal in relation to its ability
to cope with its environment. Over recent years, animal scientists have become increasingly
concerned about animal feelings. Realizing that it is the way an animal
feels about its situation that is the most important dimension in relation
to discussions about its welfare. The assumption that
animals are conscious and capable of experiencing
negative sensations and emotions is at the core of most
people's concern about animal welfare. Over the past few years, the term animal sentience has been
increasingly used in animal welfare. There has been an acceptance, not just
by pet owners, but also scientists, animal producers, and policy makers of
the notion that animals are sentient. And thus capable of positive and
negative feelings such as pain and fear, as well as happiness and pleasure. This has been an important development for
animals all over the world. What this has led to is a realization
that animals are not just there for human benefit, but they have needs and
feelings of their own. And that if these are not satisfied,
these animals are likely to suffer. A well-known U.K. animal welfare
scientist, professor John Webster, summed this up very nicely by saying, it's
not what we think or say that matters. It's what we do. Over the past 15 years, there has been a huge increase in
public concern about animal welfare. And an associated proliferation
of animal welfare research, as well as international voices demanding
improvements in animal welfare, not just to benefit animals, but
also for enhancing human well-being. This is not just in countries where
animal welfare has had a long tradition. But also in parts of the world
where animals have historically had little value, and
where there's still a long way to go to improve human attitudes towards
animals and their welfare. Animal welfare science provides us with a
lens through which we can address concerns about animal welfare through using
objective measures of animal responses. Moving us much closer to understanding
the world through their eyes. Using this approach can provide
us with a universal language, one that transcends culture,
religion, and language. And ensures that the truth about animals
and there welfare cannot be disputed.