So, there's a really wide range of
problems that arise from the way that we've manipulated dogs to
be such different shapes. So, we've got short muzzled dogs,
dogs with very long backs, dogs that are very large or very small. And they've gone past extremes, that means
that there's problems associated with with her inherited diseases. There's over 300 diseases
that are related to, have a component of
inheritance in domestic dog. Of which 63 are directly
related to their shape. My particular interest was about
skull shape, and how reducing the length of the muzzle particularly,
has led to severe problems with breathing difficulties in popular breeds like the
pug the bulldog and the French bulldog. So in these breeds, the muzzle to the skeleton of
the skull has been reduced in size. But unfortunately there's lots
of soft tissues within the skull haven't been reduced which means that
there's a lot of resistance to air, so when the dogs try to breathe,
they can find that quite difficult. And that can manifest as
the dogs being unable to participate in normal
day-to-day doggy activities. So they can't exercise normally, perhaps
playing with other dogs and going for a normal walk. They overheat very easily. Some dogs actually faint because
of their inability to get enough oxygen into their bloodstream. It also has issues with them
being able to eat properly. Many dogs ha, choke an awful
lot when they're trying to eat. They can't sleep very well
because they're woken up, the fact that they can't
breathe in the night. So it really is a real
suite of welfare problems while they're both awake and asleep. My research showed that as muzzle length
decreases, so as we go from perhaps a longer muzzle breed like greyhound,
to shorter muscle breed like bulldog or a pug, the risk of this
welfare-relevant disorder increases. So the shorter muzzle dogs are at
a much higher risk of being a, unable to breathe properly in
normal everyday situations. There's multiple solutions that
involve lots of different groups. So, for example we can start
with breeder's specifically. If their breeding for the show ring, and
breed standards, we can change those standards so they don't encourage
particularly extreme morphologies, so we don't encourage these
really short muzzles. We've already got show judges,
making sure that they don't reward particularly extreme morphology so
we can move to a healthier body shape. We've also got vets. Vets need to educate owners, potentially
new owners in the puppy buying public because we need these market forces to
actually have a demand for healthy dogs. So not just dogs that are fashionable or
that people like because of their looks, but dogs that are actually functional and
healthy. If you own a dog that ha,
is at high risk, and indeed some of these breeds are incredibly
popular and getting more popular, owners need to be really vigilant and they
need to know what they are looking for. They need to be listening to the breathing
of their dogs, and if it's particularly increased and loud, If their dog snores
while it's asleep or indeed makes snoring noises while it's awake, they should to
be looking to seek veterinary attention. Same in terms of if they notice that their
dog has difficulties while it's walking or, indeed, it gets worse overtime,
then they need to intervene. Because the prognosis for treatment becomes worse over time so,
owners need to be really vigilant. They can also do things to try and improve
their dogs welfare if they are affected. So, for example, they can make
sure their dog's always cool, not taking them out on
hot days in Scotland. They can make sure that
they wear a harness so they don't have too much
pressure on their dog's neck, which could cause them more
difficulties with breathing. And they can make sure they keep them
lean, they need to make sure their dog isn't overweight, which can increase their
risk even further, from our research. >> Thank you very much.