Although behavior responses
are usually easier to observe and more accessible to us, we mustn't ignore the fact that there are
a variety of other measurements that could be used to provide us with information
about how the animal is functioning. >> Both behavioral tests give
us much more direct access to how an animal is experiencing its life. We can also use physiological
measures of welfare because they provide an indirect
measure of an animal's experience. >> There is a sequence that makes
up an animal's overall experience. Firstly, the animal gets sensory
input from the environment. Then the brain evaluates this information
in relation to a number of factors, including the animals
previous experiences. This process may lead to activation of the
parts of the brain that control emotions causing a response that might be positive,
or negative, or even neutral. The body responds to the emotion with
behavioral and physiological responses. These reactions enable the animal
to adapt to its environment, enabling it to return to normal,
something that's called homeostasis. When faced with something that is
quite a complicated internal response, welfare researchers have broken this
down into the various components that relate to the animal's physiological
response to a stressful situation. This is made up of an immediate response
system sometimes called the flight or fight response to ensure that
the animal is capable of escaping or attacking if need be to protect itself. As well as one that caters for
the longer term requirements to maintain the response, and then to ensure the
animal's body function returns to normal. Being on constant alert is
an energetic business, and the sooner the animal can rectify the
situation through it's behavior responses, the sooner the things
can return to normal. >> Activation of the stress response
occurs when an animal perceives something, we call that a stimulus
as being of significance. Usually that's something that is
frightened of or that's painful and is threat to it's well being. Immediately the body goes into protective
mode and a coping mechanism is stimulated. The amygdala is an area of the brain where
the animal's emotional centers are and a threat will cause a chain
of brain chemical responses as a result of activation of
the Sympathetic-Adrenal-Medullary Axis, sometimes called the SAM axis. Immediately, there will be a rise in
the blood hormone called adrenaline, which will provide that energy burst
needed to respond effectively. At the same time, there is a slower but
more longer acting response being initiated in the part of the brain
next to the amygdala, the hippocampus. The Hypothalmic Pituitary Adrenal axis,
or HPA axis, controls reactions to stresses,
and regulates many body processes, including digestion in the in function,
and even mood. Activation of the HPA axis is
associated with increases in hormones such as cortisol, which can be measured in
an animal's blood, saliva and even feces. Measurements that can be made to see
if the SAM axis has been activated include heart rate and
heart rate variation. And this is often used in animal welfare
studies as a way to very simply record immediate responses to changing situations
within an animal's housing environment and in relation to handling by humans. Another measure of SAM
activity is adrenaline. And although it requires multiple quick
succession sampling, it can be useful for looking at the immediate
consequences of painful situations such as the impact of branding on sheep. As can be seen from the graph, hot branding shown by the red bar
leads to a much higher rise in adrenaline 30 seconds after the branding
iron has been applied, as compared with the freeze branding that is no different
from having no brand applied at all. Whilst useful, the use of measures
of some axis activity for assessing animal welfare are limited
because of the short term nature of the response, which is why the HPA
axis measurements are useful. The HPA axis responds more slowly. For example it can take an average
of around two to ten minutes, for a rise in the levels of cortisol
in blood to be measurable. But this does mean that
it's easier to measure, and to work out recovery over time. >> There are a number of events in
an animal's life that can cause a stress response, but these are not all
necessarily of welfare concern. Some may be positive emotional
experiences and important for enabling the animal to learn. Humans often seek out experiences that
cause a fear or stress response, such as the adrenaline surge associated with
driving a fast car or even bungee jumping. Stress has only become a concern for animal welfare when the animal is
being continually challenged and stressed beyond it's capacity to
emotionally and physically cope. In turn this can cause changes within
the immune system leading to increase disease susceptibility, poor growth,
and reduced production. All of this results in animal suffering. >> When the HPA access is activated the
result is a cascade of chemical responses in different parts of the animals brain
and body that leads the pituitary gland to release a hormone called Adrenal
Corticotropic hormone, which is ACTH. This in turn stimulates the adrenal
glands to release circulating hormones, Glucocorticoids. The one that's most commonly
measured in mammals is cortisol, and in birds, corticosterone. Measurements of cortisol can be made
to identify the situations that cause a negative stress response
by looking at levels in blood and also saliva, urine, feces, and even milk. Although sampling blood may not
always be possible, sampling urine, milk, and saliva is relatively easy,
and in general, noninvasive, providing a practical
option that can be better for welfare. In this example,
you can see the way cortisol differs in two environments where pigs
are housed for giving birth. Sows in open pens with straw
where they can build a nest had far lower cortisone levels, than those
kept in farrowing pens on hard floors, with no possibility of building a nest. In order to use this method,
samples need to be analyzed for cortisol concentration
by a trained person. There are too main methods, and the one being used here is
called the Eliza method. >> I'm Susan Richmond. I'm a PhD student here with SOEC and
University of Edinborough and I'm in my third year and we're looking at new ways
to assess the welfare of hill sheep. And Eliza is an enzyme linked to which
we're using to look at the presence of in sheep feces. Then Eliza can be used for looking at
the concentration of other substances and in other bodily fluids such as saliva,
blood, urine and as well as the feces that we're using. We have a few methods that we're using, a few indicators that we're using
to assess the sheep's welfare. And we have a variety of behavioral and
physiological measures. And I'm using the for the physiological
measure, for the assessment. We followed our protocol for
the initial stages and now we're left with this plate,
which has our sample, our antibodies attached to the wells,
and also other chemicals in there, and we can put the plate into the plate reader
to look at the concentration in the wells. The plate reader reads the plate and
in a matter of seconds and this is one of the outputs that we get. You can see the graph and
the values in the cells below. And we can see here that this graph here
shows our standard curve and we do that to make sure that we can trust the results
that we're getting from the plate. And because we have the same
individuals on the one plate, and I can look at how that
individual's changing over time. So across the seasons and gestation and also look if we have any other data on
the animal, any other health problems, any leaveness and other behavioral
measures to look at how these are changing as a whole throughout the whole
picture of the animal. We can't just rely on this one measure
to tell us everything we need to know about the animal. And as we been collecting a variety
of behavioral measures along with and some other physiological measures. We have to look at cross
validating these two things. So whether physiology is cross validated
with the behaviour and vice versa. To build a more true picture of what
the animal is really experiencing. >> There are a variety of
different hormones and challenge tests, as well as immunological
measures, that have now been developed. But none of them are without
their limitations. These are mainly down to the problems
with getting a sample without stressing the animal and influencing the situation. The need for laboratory facilities for
analyzing the samples, and the challenge of interpreting what
the results really mean for that animal. Measuring the animal's physiological
stress response cannot tell us everything that we want to
know about an animals experience, we also need behavioral measures, and in
order to interpret the results we need to look at how the physiological measures
relate to what the animal is doing. This is why animal welfare scientists use
a battery of measures together to make sure that they have the best evidence for assessing the situation from
the animal's point of view.