Hello, everybody. Nat and I would just like to talk
to you about some of the way that we discuss these very immortive
animal welfare issues on our forums and on our discussion boards. We recognize that animal welfare is
a topic which we're very passionate about. And we have a lot of opinions and
a lot of feelings about animal welfare. Nat and I do as well, but it's important
that while we're on the forums we treat each other with respect and that we have
our debates in a constructive manner. So Nat and I are just gonna talk
a little bit about having a debate about an animal welfare topic and we're
going to show you two ways of doing it. And one of which is going to be
a slightly incendiary way and the other is going to be
a more respectful way. So for example, Nat and I disagree on animal welfare issues
quite a lot of the time in fact. >> Well, we don't disagree
on animal welfare issues. We disagree sometimes on
the emphasis put on animal welfare. >> Yes, absolutely. [LAUGH] But Nat and I still have a very good working
relationship and even a friendship. Even though we sometimes
have these disagreements. And so we're gonna demonstrate
exactly how that works. So, for examples sake,
let's say I was to say, Nat, I think you're absolutely wrong about that
animal welfare issue you mentioned about. In fact, I think what you said
was really actually quite stupid. >> Well,
I'm really sorry that you felt that way. But I have an opinion. And, in fact, I believe very strongly
that the evidence that I brought to that discussion was much better
than the evidence that you brought. And, in fact, I can't see why you
would have such a stupid opinion. >> You clearly haven't looked
at my evidence at all, have you? >> No, I haven't, in fact, I'm not sure
why I'm reading it at all, I mean, it really is quite a waste of my time. >> That's an idiotic view point,
you are clearly an uninformed idiot. So that might be a little bit melodramatic
but that's the kind of thing that can happen when our passions are aroused
by animal welfare issues. And one of the things that we can do as
a bit of conflict resolution is to try and change the way we talk about things. So one thing we could do is we could
talk about how something makes us feel. So let's run this again using
slightly more respectful language. So, Nat, that animal welfare issue
you talked about, I was very concerned about one of the things that
you mentioned and it worries me a lot. >> Okay,
well I'm sorry that you're worried, so perhaps we can discuss it further so
that we can better understand each other. >> Absolutely. Some of the evidence that I saw,
I am not convinced by it. What can you tell me about that? >> Okay, well let me go into
a little bit more detail, and then perhaps afterwords you can tell me
whether that helps clarify the points. >> Absolutely. So your evidence has talked about this. I have further evidence,
which I'm not so sure about. And, in the end, I don't think
we're going to agree on this one. >> So it might be that we
have a difference of opinion, perhaps based on our different
ethical perspectives, our different cultural sensitivities,
our knowledge of different things. And it might be that we're just gonna
have to agree to disagree on this. >> I think so. You see, when we're talking to
each other on the internet and on these discussion forums and boards. We can't always see one another. We can't see our facial expressions. And we can't actually always remember that
there's somebody, a person, on the other side of the screen who's reading what
you say and maybe very offended by it. >> Yes, so I think it's really
important that we recognize that we want people to have robust
debate because that makes for, I think much stronger discussions and
it means we actually test ourselves. So that's all good. But we also recognize that we have
to do that in a very respectful and sensitive way. So that we do actually give people room
to have a different opinion to ours, and even to challenge the evidence that we
sometimes feel is absolutely concrete. But somebody else might
have a better version or they might have stronger evidence. So I think it's important for us to recognize that science is
all about the pursuit of truth. It's not always about the fact
that it is the truth, and people have different
ethical perspectives. >> Absolutely. So when your interacting with one
another on the forums we have some key messages for you. The first, remember to talk
about how something makes you feel instead of talking
about somebody else. Use language like I feel worried about
this, or I feel concerned about this. >> Or it is my opinion. >> It is my opinion that such and
such thing is the case. Remember that there is somebody else
on the other side of the screen, and your words can hurt. Read over what you said especially if
it's made you feel angry or upset and think is this definitely something
I want to post right now? Would it be better if I go away have
a cup of tea come back and read it again? And-
>> And also yes, I mean recognize that the two of us are communicating
not just with words and in fact. A lot of our ability to have robust discussion is based around
the fact that we can see each other. And so, we're using expressions to try and
soften the blow. We might smile for example when we're saying something
the other person might not agree with. It's difficult to do that when you
are using words on a computer. But there are ways of doing that and you can show that you have
different emotions using different, I don't know what they're called actually,
little symbols that you can use. >> Yes, you can use emoticons. >> Little smile faces. >> So you can put a smile in and
you can even just say to somebody, I am being sarcastic right now or
use language that, remember you've got to utilize your full range of expression
online as well as best you can. >> Yes, so I think our quote for
today is going to be that nothing great can be achieved without respect and
also without enthusiasm. So we hope that you'll have extremely
enthusiastic discussion, but also very respectful. >> Absolutely. We look forward to seeing you there. Good bye! >> Bye!