In this session, we'll investigate some
of the ways that scientists use to assess animal welfare,
using the five freedoms and beyond. Professor Bramble reported to the UK
government on animal welfare and suggested that all animals should have
the freedom from pain and discomfort. This was then expanded upon by the Farm
Animal Welfare Council in the early 70s to what is now internationally
recognized as The Five Freedoms. These are the freedom from hunger and
thirst. The freedom from pain, injury and disease. The freedom from fear and distress. The freedom from discomfort, and
the freedom to display natural behaviors. The five freedoms are great because, they are an internationally recognized
method of assessing animal welfare. However, they do have some benefits and
some limitations. For example, you'll notice that
the first four of those freedoms, are all the freedoms from something. They're very negative,
whereas the fifth freedom, the freedom to display natural behavior,
is a positive. This mismatch between the positives and negatives can make the Five Freedoms
a little unwieldy to use. The Five Freedoms are also a little
bit more difficult to use for companion animals or wild animals. For example all wild animals have the
freedom to display natural behaviors but we can still affect their
welfare in other ways so do the Five Freedoms really
apply to them in the same way? For this reason, we have come up with
other ways of assessing animal welfare, other animal welfare frameworks,
such as the Duty of Care framework. Unlike the Five Freedoms, the duty of care
framework focuses on what we can provide animals, providing them with a safe,
happy environment that they can enjoy. And it also encourages legal
responsibility to the owner, or the animal caretaker, to make sure that they provide these
animals with a good welfare environment. Although the different animal welfare
frameworks can take different approaches, they all serve the same purpose. An animal welfare framework
helps us to assess and describe how an animal is
coping with its environment. The Five Freedoms may have been designed
to describe production animal welfare, but they can be adapted to describe
the welfare of this pet cat. She's clearly had a little bit too
much freedom from hunger and thirst. And this has compromised her freedom from
disease, causing her to become obese. Her natural behaviors are also limited
because she's reluctant to play and jump. And she may be uncomfortable,
which would, of course, compromise her freedom from discomfort. Another welfare framework, such as the
duty of care, which focus instead of what this cat needs to have good welfare,
such as a balanced diet. Both frameworks would agree that this
cat's welfare is compromised due to her obesity, and that portion control
will improve the situation.