Hi everybody and welcome to the Budongo
Trail, this is a chimpanzee exhibit here at the Edinburgh Zoo, run by
the royal zoological society of Scotland. This exhibit has been designed with
the specific needs of chimpanzees in mind, there are two original groups of
chimpanzees that are housed within the exhibit, these two groups
come from very different places. The first group is a group
of chimps that have lived, have been resident within the zoo for many years, the second groups of chimps
come from research laboratories in Europe. Although these two groups have
species-specific similarities, there are also significant differences
in their behavior based on their previous learning experiences. This enclosure has been designed,
to meet the needs of these animals. In the wild, chimps have what we
call a fission-fusion society, this means that they live in large social
groups, but within those social groups, small pockets of chimpanzees,
may split off into smaller groups and may move away, and then return to
the main group at different times. This enclosure has been designed, to allow
that flexibility of behavior to happen with different pods around the enclosure
allowing different groups of chimps, to either socialize together or
to move away separately and socialize in smaller
groups as they desire. Enclosure design, is often one of the most focused upon
aspects of captive wildlife management. It's often what the public will
judge a facility on, and for facilities that are open to the public. Enclosure design needs to work, both from
a public viewing perspective, as well as, from an animal welfare perspective. Much research has been done on
the effects of the captive environment, on animal behavior. This study, by Club and Mason in 2007, looked at the relationship between minimum
home range size in wild animals, and the pacing frequency in these same
species in the captive situation. Pacing is an abnormal repessive behavior, often shown by carnivores
in captive environments. This study showed a positive correlation
between species that would naturally roam for significant distances in the wild,
and the frequency of pacing in captivity. This means that animals which have a very
large home range size in the wild, are more likely to exhibit abnormal
pacing behaviors in captivity. Studies like this have led to significant
changes in how enclosures are designed, It is important to recognize that
these far ranging species are also much more likely to interact with a more
complex variety of ecosystems, terrain, conspecifics, and also other species
than animals with smaller home ranges. And this complexity, as well as, the space needs to be accommodated
in the captive environment. This polar bear enclosure,
at the Highland Wildlife Park in Scotland, provides the two bears with four acres
of natural terrain, plus swimming opportunities, a variety of enrichment
activities, and an indoor shelter. These two bears, are also able to
interact socially with each other. Another factor which research has
demonstrated to be beneficial to the species in captivity, despite them traditionally being
considered solitary in the wild. It's also important for us to recognize
the way that we perceive the world, is very different to the way that
other animals see the world, and so it's very difficult for us to judge their
social connections, because most of the time, their social interactions
will be very different from ours. Polar bears for example, can smell
other polar bears for many kilometers. So, if their within sniffing
distance of another polar bear, are they ever really alone in the way
we consider ourselves to be alone. The application of welfare
science research, is important in providing the best environments we can for
captive wild animals, and for assessing whether all animal species
are able to cope with the restrictions and challenges of a life under human care. This type of enclosure, was traditionally
designed simply to display animals to the public as a menagerie. Barren environments are often cited as a
cause of abnormal repetitive behaviors in captive wild animals, and
that can certainly be the case. However, the development
of abnormal behavior, is usually more complex than
the simplistic approach. Repetitive behavior is induced by
frustration, repeated attempts to cope and all central nervous system dysfunction
as defined by Georgia Mason, It may result from current or
even previous trauma or frustration. Early trauma may include experiences
such as early maternal separation, as seen in this bear cub. [SOUND] Maternal separation and social deprivation for training and performances, like this chimp. [SOUND] or maternal separation for exhibition to the public, like this macaque. An animal's early experiences and even its
experiences in utero, can actually result in changes to its brain and have
significant impacts on its behavior for the rest of its life, even when
moved to much better environments. Sanctuaries and sometimes zoos, regularly
have to deal with such damaged animals, and this challenge can be very difficult. In companion animal behavioral medicine,
the use of medication in conjunction with behavioral modification
programs is well tolerated. As we except that animals are less able
to learn or to adapt to new situations, if in a state of high anxiety or
if coming from a deprived environment. However, there are numerous public
concerns with the use of such medications, in exotic animal species to
treat psychological injury. Recognizing that no matter
how committed they are, human caregivers can never replicate
the unique and complex mother infant bond, Good zoos focus on providing
optimal environments and husbandry, to support mother rearing rather than
attempting to hand raise infant animals. Another area where we need to focus on
providing optimal environments is for geriatric animals. We can all recognize that with
a few notable exceptions, the majority of species we manage in
captivity live significantly longer than their wild counterparts. With regular provision of nutritious food,
medical care, absence of predation, and a clean environment, we would expect animals in captivity to
enjoy a better quality of life, but it is important to recognize that quantity of
life does not equate to quality of life. And it is possible for welfared animals
to live in states of continual pain, suffering, or frustration for many years. When considering
behavioral repertoires and physical health, we should remember
that old age is not a disease. It is, however, common for animals to suffer from diseases
associated with old age. Disease, such as dental infections,
heart disease, and osteoarthritis, can affect
how animals behave. Potentially reducing their activity
levels, increasing their resting behavior, causing them to display increased
aggression or irritability, or even abnormal repetitive behaviors
like stereopathy, It is important to recognize that these diseases
associated with old age can be treated. In order to ensure that animals are not
suffering from pain or discomfort associated with these disease processes,
regular observation and analysis of their behaviors is important, If there
are behavioral changes which may indicate underlying disease processes, then further
investigations should be undertaken. Some sanctuaries and zoos proactively
anesthetize their geriatric animals, to screen them for underlying health
problems every one or two years. This proactive approach
provides a useful opportunity, to collect baseline information on these
comparatively unusual species, and allows veterinarians and caretakers to
track the impact that future medication or husbandry interventions, may have on the
animal's health and welfare, as well as diagnosing current disease, before
it has a significant welfare impact. Of course in some situations,
disease, injury, or psychological dysfunction creates a
significant reduction in quality of life, If the animal is unable to be provided
with a good quality of life, and treatment or improved management is not
available, euthanasia may be considered. Humane euthanasia does not consider
the ethical concept of right to life, but instead considers the role of
a humane death in ending physical or mental suffering, usually when all
the options have been explored. Enclosures may need to be modified
to accommodate breeding animals, or those that are of advanced age, In order
to ensure that the spaces are safe and do not expose the more vulnerable
animals to excessive competitions or to bullying from conspecifics. Enclosures should accommodate
natural behaviors, and provide a range of
behavioral opportunities. Recognizing that wild animals
may live in their enclosures for many years, structured variety, and enclosure refurbishment
should be an ongoing process. And animals should be
provided with refuges, and opportunities to avoid
exhibition if needed. Animal welfare science is a continually
evolving field, and has only recently been applied to the management of captive wild
animals in zoos, sanctuaries and circuses. It is vital that if we are to understand
their behavioral, psychological and physical needs of these complex species,
and to provide for those needs in a captive setting,
that we collaborate effectively, recognizing that if we are to provide
good welfare, the animal's needs and feelings are fundamental
to guiding our actions. Whilst we may have differences of opinion
on the ethical value of wild animals in captivity, what matters for
the animals is how they're cared for and what they're provided with as this affects
their experience and thus their welfare. Our actions shape the lives of our
animals, and in terms of animal welfare, it matters not what we think or
feel It matters what we do.