The stress of modern society means that
many of our dogs are having a negative experience. A lack of socialization, rehoming, a lack
of off-lead exercise, and being left home alone for many hours at a time, mean that
many of our dogs are stressed and anxious. We live in a much faster paced
world than we did 50 years ago. Many of us work long hours five or six days a week, live in tiny flats in
a built up city, and have access now to any breed we want as a pet regardless
of what it was originally bred to do. All of these changes have placed stress
on the human-dog relationship, and often, people seems to think about
dogs almost as a convenience or disposable item,
rather than a sentient being. All of these stresses and our own busy
lifestyles mean that our dogs are more likely to exhibit problem behaviors, and
we're more likely to look for a quick fix. To really ensure good dog welfare, we have
to make an effort to listen to our dogs and communicate effectively,
in a way that they understand. And this is positive, not just for
dog welfare, but also human welfare. Rates of reported dog bite injuries
in the UK are increasing, and children are the members of society
most likely to be bitten by dogs. But the majority of dogs
are not naturally aggressive. It is important that we understand how our
dogs communicate, so that we can avoid putting them in situations where they feel
like biting might be their only option. Biting is a last resort, just like a human
punching another human is a last resort. So, by recognizing and understanding
the behaviors that precede it, we can prevent both dog and children
from being put in difficult situations. There are lots of myths surrounding
what some dog behavior means. For example, a wagging tail
always means a dog is happy and raised hackles means they're aggressive,
but this may not be the case. Hackles start from the neck and
go all along the dog's back, to the base of the tail. Raised hackles can be
caused by excitement, stimulation, arousal,
being startled, fear or interest. It is rare that hackles are raised in an
aggressive manner, though it does happen. Some dog owners have even noticed
that different areas of their dogs' hackles rise in different situations. Interpreting a wagging tail relies
on observing the height of the tail, the speed of the wag,
the breadth of the wag, and even which side the tail
appears to wag more on. For example, tiny high-speed movements
that give the impression of the tail vibrating, are signs that the dog is about
to do something, usually run or fight. If the tail is held high while vibrating,
it is more likely an active threat. A broad wag is friendly, saying I am
not challenging or threatening you. This can also mean I'm pleased, which
is the closest to the popular concept of the happiness wag, especially if
the tail seems to drag the hips with it. Research has also been done now to show
that when dogs feel generally positive about something or someone, their tails wag more to
the right side of their rear ends. And when they have negative feelings,
their tail wagging is biased to the left. The BSAVA, British Small
Animal Veterinary Association, has created the ladder of aggression. This is an extremely useful aid
into learning the signs that a dog usually exhibits before it ever
has to reach the biting stage. If we look at the very bottom of
the ladder of aggression, we can see that a dog that is ever so slightly anxious
will yawn, blink, or lick its nose. These are displacement behaviors. We can often see the whites
of the eyes here, too. As the anxiety level increases slightly
the dog will turn its head away from the situation or
object causing the anxiety. Next, it will turn its whole body away and
sit or start lifting its paw. If the situation doesn't improve for the
dog, it will try and walk away from it. This must always be respected. The dog is being sensible and
trying to escape the stressor. If the dog is not allowed to get away,
then we'll see the ears go back and often gaze averting too. This is all being done in an attempt
to communicate that it is anxious. And now, as they get more anxious, we
will start to see some very obvious body language changes, standing crouched,
with their tail tucked under. You can see that this dog is also showing
the whites of her eyes, is gaze averting, and has her ears back. Now this one confuses a lot of people,
lying down, leg up, is a sign of anxiety. Look how this dog shoots up
the ladder in a matter of seconds. It's anxiety level will already be
high because it is at the vet's. He is using, in his mind,
very obvious body language to communicate he is scared and
would rather be left alone. This is not submission,
which is what we used to believe. This is appeasement. This is a dog's way of saying, I don't
want any trouble, please leave me alone. This dog does not want a belly rub,
even though this is what it looks like. Some dogs do enjoy this. In the past,
they may have made this appeasing gesture, been given a belly rub and enjoyed it,
so have now learned to ask for them. But, not this dog in this situation. And now, we are getting into dangerous
territory as the dog is feeling the need to have to defend itself,
rather than give off appeasing signs. So we will see the dog stiffen up and
stare. Next, we have the growl. The dog is now very close to
having to finally bite, but it is still communicating with us. If your dog does this, don't punish it. It's telling you how it feels. Stop doing whatever it is you are doing
that is making it so defensive. If a dog is punished every time it growls, it may not bother growling in the future,
and go straight for the bite. Remember, the dog is not
trying to dominate you or the situation,
it is communicating how it feels. Next, we have the snap. Often this is enough for us to finally
realize the dog was really anxious, and we should have listened sooner. But if we still don't get the message, then the dog is left with no choice but
to bite. Dogs will usually use all these signals in
the ladder of aggression on us, dogs, and even other species. Smaller dogs will often climb
up the ladder of aggression much more quickly than bigger dogs,
missing out altogether many of the signals that we usually see just
before a snap or a bite, like a growl. This is because many of them have
learned that there is no point. If a German Shepherd or a Doberman growls, then people will usually
back straight off. But if a Chihuahua or a Yorkie do it,
then we're often amused by it, and don't take it seriously saying, aw,
look at you, trying to be all big and brave, but we still try and approach them. They've learned that it doesn't
work to go through all the signals, and they have to escalate to
the top of the ladder immediately. Now we need to learn. By recognizing what dogs need, observing
these changes in body language and how they behave, we can then respond
to them in an appropriate manner and help to prevent some of the problems
we see in today's dogs. This will lead to an improved
relationship with our dogs and hopefully reduce the number of
fear-related bites that happen each year. This, in turn, will reduce the amount of
dogs that end up in rescue shelters or are euthanized each year.