My name's Susan Jarvis. And today, I'd like to talk to you about
some of the welfare issues surrounding the keeping of pigs for meat production. Around the world, there are differing
attitudes towards the keeping of pigs for meat production and this is due to
various and different cultural beliefs. However, there are around 1
billion pigs produced globally and therefore it's imperative that
we consider their welfare. There's a large population of
pigs within the EU and the USA. But actually, nearly half of the world's
population are produced in China, and this is also a growing market. So, this short presentation will consider
the main welfare issues for the pregnant and lactating sow and for piglets during
the first few weeks of their lives. So, let's take a look at
the pig production circle and highlight the main stages
that we'll consider. So if we begin with the mating or service
of the sow, she's then pregnant for around 115 days. And this is known as the gestation period. The sow then gives birth or farrows. She then feeds the piglets,
known as the lactation period. The piglets are then weaned which is when
the piglets are removed from the sow and moved onto solid food only. Following weaning, the sows will
come back into heat, or oestrus, and will then be mated again to become
pregnant with the next litter. Following weaning, the piglets will grow,
and then be finished for meat production. Pregnancy is an extremely important time
for the sow and her developing piglets. Management has to ensure that the sow
receives sufficient nutrition for herself and
also to maintain her pregnancy. There's growing evidence in humans
that stress during pregnancy can have long term detrimental
effects on her offspring, such as a loss of pregnancy, low birth
weight, poor development of the fetus. And also issues later in life, such as
learning difficulties, Diabetes Type 2, chronic heart disease, and also a greater
predisposition to anxiety and depression. There's also growing evidence in non-human
animals, including work cows out here in Edinburgh and pigs, show that stress
during pregnancy can have long term, negative impacts on
the welfare of the offspring. Therefore, it's incredibly important
that we consider the well-being of sows during pregnancy, for herself and
also for her developing piglets. So I'd like to talk
about two main stressors that sows experience during pregnancy. The first is housing. Sows are predominantly
kept in gestation stalls. These are individual stalls
in which the feeder and drinker are placed at the front. Normally these have slotted floors so
that cleaning is minimal. The restriction over the gestation period,
along with food restriction which we'll talk about later, can lead
to the development of stereotypies. Such as bar biting and chain chewing
as can be seen in this video. Within the EU, gestation stalls are no
longer used to the majority of pregnancy. And this has been as of
the first of January 2013. However gestation stalls
are the predominant system used for pregnant sows globally. As such within the EU, we now have to
group house sows during pregnancy, and they have space for movement. However, there are welfare
concerns with group posing. When sows are mixed into new groups,
this can lead to aggression and damage to the sows while they sort
out their dominance hierarchy. The next video clip will show you a group
of young female sows who've just been recently mixed into a new group. Research here in Edinburgh showing that
when we mix pregnant sows into new groups, this leads to aggression and can cause damage to the sows in
the form of scratches or skin lesions. If we quantify these skin lesions,
we can use this as a proxy measure of the level of aggressiveness that has
occurred during the mixing event. This graph shows a large increase in the
number of skin lesions of sows that have been mixed into new
groups during pregnancy compared to those sows
that have not been mixed. Therefore, it's important to minimize
social mixing during pregnancy of sows, and to manage the system using
stable groups wherever possible. This not only has positive implications
for the welfare of the sow but also minimizes the negative
impacts of stress during pregnancy on the developing piglets. The other stressor during pregnancy
that I'd like to consider is hunger. There's been considerable
genetic selection for increased litter size and
for rapid growth rate. As a consequence, piglet's have
the potential to grow very fast. As they share half of their
genes with their mother, she too has the potential to grow fast. But to be able to reproduce her
growth has to be restricted. Therefore sows are feed restricted
during pregnancy to prevent rapid growth of the sow. She's fed enough to maintain her litter
and the body weight suitable for reproduction. This raises the issue of
hunger in pregnant sows. Some work has looked at maintaining
the energy levels of diets but increasing the bulkiness of the diet
to minimize the feeling of hunger. In fact within the EU,
sow diets now have to contain fiber or sows have to be given
access to fiber sources. In addition, sows are normally fed
their daily ration once a day. They normally eat this ration
within a few minutes and then have to wait a further 24
hours before they're fed again. The anticipation of
the delivery of this ration can lead to high states of arousal and
high levels of vocalization. In addition to hunger and housing, there are other welfare issues that we
need to consider for the pregnant sow. Such as udder and uterine infections, and
also painful experiences such as lameness. However, I hope you've seen that we
need to consider the management of the pregnant sow. And to minimize stress to not
only improve her welfare but also the welfare of her
piglets in the longer term.