Dogs are often considered to
be man's best friend, but we've given them a very
rough deal over the years. We've not only misunderstood their body
language and behavior for decades, we've also incorrectly declared that they
have a dominance hierarchy going on, with an alpha dog, the leader of the pack,
who rules with dominance and aggression. Dominance hierarchy refers to a system in
animal groups that is based on a pecking order, usually established and maintained
by behavior in aggressive encounters. One, or a few members,
hold a highest rank, and the others are submissive to
those ranking higher, and dominant to those ranking lower,
like a chain of command. We've been led to believe that all dogs
are trying to be the alpha dog and that their aim in life is to be top dog,
and dominate not only all of the dogs,
but also us. And that if we don't show them who's boss,
if we feed them first, or let them walk through doors before us,
or let them sleep on our beds, or we don't alpha role them, or we pin
them to the floor as punishment, then we are in danger of being dominated by the
very pet we thought we were friends with. We've basically got it very wrong. There is still much confusion
about the use of the term, dominant, as a character
trait of an individual dog. Although some ethologists
have warned against the use of the term dominant
to describe individual dogs, there are also many high profile
examples in the dog training world, where dominance is described as
a characteristic of an individual dog. Among ethologists, dominance is normally
attributed to the usual behavior between two individuals when they
interact over a situation, or a resource, in which one will
always back down rather than fight. The status of the consistent
winner is known as dominant and that of the loser, subordinate. We now understand,
through research that has been done, that dominance is not something which is
fought for, but something that is given. Dominant dogs don't reinforce their
status by being continuously aggressive. Subordinate dogs reinforce it by
giving off formal appeasing signals, as they usually recognize, or
learn from past experiences, supremacy. It's a bit like saying an elected
government is dominant. Well they are, but
only because we voted them in. These general principles underly how
dogs interact with each other, but there will obviously also be differences
depending on previous learning experiences and individual motivation. It is now generally accepted, that the
term dominant should be used to describe relationships rather than individuals. So, where does the idea of where
dominance hierarchy come from in dogs? This notion came from studies done in
the 1930s and 1940s on captive and unrelated wolves in a zoo in Switzerland. While studying the sociology of the wolf,
they noted a male lead wolf and his accompanying bitch, form a pair,
and by incessant control, violent rivalries between
individual members of the pack and repression of all types of competition,
they could defend their social position. One of the main problems with ththise
study was that it didn't involve any study of wolves in the wild. For decades, this was the only
study done on wolf behavior, and later research would publish similar
findings on the dominant, subordinate and leader-follower relationships
within captive wolf packs. So, the notion of alpha
wolf was reinforced. In more recent years, applied ethologists
have spent more time studying wolves in the wild and observing different
behaviors from those zoo-bound wolves. These studies have shown that
wild wolves live in families, two parents with their younger cubs or
pups. They observed that they do not
have an innate sense of rank. There is no dominant, supreme leader and
no submissive, cowering follower. They are a cooperative,
cohesive family unit. The supposed alphas are what we would
call, in any other social group, parents. The offspring naturally
follow their parents, as you would expect in any other species. Nobody has won the role
of dominance by fighting. They simply are dominant, or in charge, for want of a better expression, by
the simple fact that they are the parents. As the pups become older, they do not
try and overthrow the supposed alpha. They simply, eventually disperse, mate,
have their own pups and therefore, form their own pack. Subtly, those captive wolves
first studied were unrelated in an enclosed environment
with limited resources. And resources matter to animals,
and humans. Different individuals find different
resources more precious or important than others. For some, food is a resource
worth guarding, protecting, or even fighting for, over anything else. For others, it might be that their bed
is their most important resource, but they're less motivated
to guard their food. For our dogs, it might be their
favorite toy, a bone, but not their dinner in a bowl, or even their
owner, that is their most prized resource. They are individuals with
individual preferences and concerns, and guarding a resource should
not be misinterpreted as an attempt at being this mythical alpha being. It's important that when we
are looking at dog behavior here, that we actually look at dogs and not base
it on historical work done on a different species, just like we wouldn't base
human behavior on chimpanzee studies. So we need to remember, too,
that dogs are not wolves. Dogs have been domesticated
over thousands of years. They have been selected and
changed genetically to make them dependent on humans,
which is why they need to be with people. We wanted this behavior, so we bred for
those human-friendly traits. The domestic dog does not exist
independently of people, so is therefore, not wild. They may be part of our family, but they
still have their own individual dog needs that we need to ensure
we are providing for.