So hello, my name is Dr Vicky Sandilands
from the Scottish Rural College, and I'm here to talk to
you about poultry welfare. When we talk about poultry,
we're referring to domesticated fowl, particularly those that are kept for egg and meat production, such as chickens,
geese, turkeys, and ducks. In this brief session we're going
to focus on the welfare of chickens namely laying hens and meat chickens. Meat chickens are otherwise known
as broilers or broiler chickens. And these two types of chickens
produce eggs and meat. Let's talk about these two types
of chickens in more detail. So last year an estimated
65,500,000 million tons of chicken eggs were produced worldwide. Most of these eggs are table eggs or
the eggs that we eat. But some of the eggs are kept by for
hatching new flocks of broiler chickens or laying hens. And a small proportion of eggs
are kept for vaccine production. Asia is the biggest producers of eggs in
the world with about 59% of the market, followed by the Americas with 20%, Europe with 16%, Africa and
Oceania bringing up the last 5%. Here in the UK in 2013 we produced
almost 27,000 cases of eggs. There are 360 eggs in a case so
you get the picture it's a lot of eggs. 75% of these were produced in England and
Wales. Egg production can be further
broken down into housing type. In Europe laying hens are largely housed
in one of four methods of production. We're gonna discuss these in
greater detail in a few moments. So before we get into production systems, it is helpful to understand what types of
commercial breeds of laying hens are used. They can largely be split into two types,
brown or white egg layers. Usually brown hens lay brown eggs and
white hens lay white eggs. In much of the EU and North America,
white eggs, and thus white hens, are most popular. These breeds are often smaller in size
than brown hens, but they lay more egg mass, that is, the weight of all eggs
produced in a year, than brown hens. A typical white hen
probably looks like this. Brown eggs are preferred in the UK, so
we have mostly brown hens for table egg production, so let's look at the process
of egg production from start to finish. First of all we need to have breeding
flocks that will produce our chicks that will eventually
grow to be adult laying hens. Breeding flocks consist of adult males and
females kept a ratio of about one male for every ten females. And this maximizes their
breeding potential. These adult breeding flocks are typically
housed in loose house systems, in other words, on the floor with
litter or wood shavings cover, they're kept with nest boxes, and
they're allowed to mate naturally. The eggs that they lay are collected, and
these are kept in a cool storeroom for up to about ten days and until then, we can
collect lots and lots of fertilized eggs. The eggs are stored before incubating so
that the hatchery can build up a large number of eggs which
are then incubated all together and thus they all hatched together. This is known as synchronized hatching. Wild fowl employ the same technique
by laying an egg a day but delaying incubating until they
have gathered a clutch of eggs and therefore all their young hatch together
and there's safety in numbers and they run around behind their mother. After twenty-one days of incubation,
the chicks hatch. Now, once they've hatched,
the chicks have to be sexed. In other words,
identified as male or female. Unfortunately, half of all
the chicks that hatch are male and male chicks don't grow up to lay eggs so
those chicks have to be destroyed. There are several methods
of humane destruction of chicks that are permitted in the EU. Including gas methods of killing. And this is most commonly used here. The gas could be a mixture of inert
gas such as argon or nitrogen and carbon dioxide. The chicks are exposed to the gas. They lose consciousness within a few
seconds and they die shortly thereafter. The day old female chicks then go on to
be vaccinated and in many circumstances, they also get beak trimmed. Laying hens are beak trimmed as a method
of controlling feather pecking. To go back to the methods
of beak trimming, infrared beak trimming is
commonly used throughout Europe. But many countries will still use hot
blade beak trimming methods at seven to ten days old. The infrared method passes an infrared
beam across the chicks upper and lower mandibles which destroys
the blood supply to the beak tip. After a couple of weeks
the dead tissue sluffs off and a duller beak tip is left behind. In contrast, the hot blade method uses
a heated sharp blade to both cut and cauterize the beak tip. The advantages of infrared beak trimming
is that it does not require additional handling of the birds at seven to ten days
of age and also that it has been shown not to cause neuroma formation which
is also another name for nerve damage. It also doesn't show
evidence of chronic signs of pain in the birds that are treated. In contrast, hot blade trimming
does cause nerve damage, although young birds are less prone to
showing signs of nerve damage than say older birds that need to be trimmed when
there's been a feather pecking outbreak. So after beak trimming and vaccination
the chicks are transported in temperature controlled vehicles to a rearing farm. They're not provided with any feed or
water during this period and that's okay as long as the transport takes no more
than 24 hours, and the chicks must arrive at their destination within 72 hours or
in other words three days of hatching. The reason we can transport chicks like
this is that they have now internalized the yolk sac that they were living
off of when they were in the egg, and the yolk sac provides them with enough
food and water to keep them going until they get to the rearing farm and they're
supplied with food and water by the farm. It is essential, though,
that once they get to the farm, they're given access to food and
water straight away. [SOUND] So now our lovely female layer
chicks have arrived on the rearing farm. What might a rearing farm look like? Layer chicks, which are also known as
pullets from now on until they're sexually mature, are broadly reared in one of
three types of housing conditions. One of those conditions is cages. Sometimes layer pullets are reared
in cages from day olds but sometimes they're reared in cages from
about seven to eight weeks of age after a short period of
being reared on the floor. Those birds that are reared in cages
go on to be housed in cages as adults. Another housing method is
being floor reared and that means from the day the chicks
arrived at the rearing farm. They're on the floor, with wood shavings,
litter, or something similar. And they stay in that system until
they're transported at point of lay. The third system is a multi-tier system. Now, these chicks will be reared in this
system only if they're going on to live in a multi-tier system as adults. So it's important that we try to match
the housing system that the pullets go to in rear to what they're going to be
living in when they're adults in lay. Otherwise birds don't adapt very well and
that's particularly important if the laying hen system is
going to be quite complex. So for example you could take a rearing
pullet from a fairly simple flooring system to a pretty uncomplex system like
a cage system but you couldn't go from a very simple rearing system like a floor
system to the multi-tier aviary system because the birds won't have learned how
to ascent and descend through the system. We're not gonna talk in further
detail about pullet rearing or pullet welfare issues here, but
if you'd like more information, you can go to your Coursera course page. At about 16 weeks of age, the pullets
are transported to the laying farm. This requires catching and handling,
placing them into transport modules, and a road trip. Within a few weeks of
arriving at the laying farm, the pullets are brought in to lay. And we do that by
stimulating them by light. We give them a longer day length. And we also increase the light
intensity with the overhead lights. This means that they become sexually
mature, and they start to lay eggs. And so from now on,
I'm gonna refer to them as laying hens. So our hens have now
arrived at our laying farm, well what would a laying farm look like? I mentioned several methods of production
earlier on, but I'm just gonna focus on free range egg production,
and furnished cage egg production. Enriched cages which are also called
furnished cages, are the only type of caged housing that are permissible for
laying hens within the EU. They were designed to give hens more
opportunities to express their natural behavior. To be more comfortable as well and they are an improvement over
the barren cage in that regard. But they are still criticized for
limiting hen behavior. These enriched cages must provide 750
square centimeters or floor space for each hen plus a nest box, scratch mat, perches,
a feed trough, and nipple drinkers. Let's look at these cages in more detail. So this is a small furnished cage
unit that we're looking at here. These cages are commercially available
cages but this is a very small cage size. It only holds 21 hens per cage. In a commercial enterprise most
furnished cages would be a lot larger. They'd hold about 60 to 80 birds per cage. But the principles are still the same,
and it still has the same furniture. And it still has the same
amount of space per bird. So if we look at this cage in front of me, let's look at some of the detail of
what the hens have available to them. Here in front of the birds,
there's a food trough. And in the food trough is
the layers mashed, that they eat. And then, if we look into the cage, and we will look inside in more detail,
in a moment. But at this end, where the cage is
brightest, there's a pecking and scratching mat underneath these hens,
here. Then running from the side to side, there
are perches, where the birds can stand, and particularly at nighttime
while they're roost. At the back of the cage,
there are nipple drinkers, where they can get access to water. And at this end of the cage, where
the cage is darkest, there's a nest box. So you can imagine that all 21 of these
hens would really struggle to show pecking and scratching behavior on that
pecking and scratching at the same time. Hens are very sociable animals so they
do tend to like to do things together. But in this case that would be impossible. Also you can imagine that after some
food is dispensed onto that scratch mat, after the third or fourth bird has
been there to peck and scratch at it, there won't be any food
left there anymore. Hens will also probably try and show dust
bathing behavior which I was just talking about on that pecking and
scratching mat but because the behavior is incomplete,
we call it sham or vacuum dust bathing. So the other drawback
about this pecking and scratching mat is that although it's
good that it's being provided and it's being provided with
food to show the behavior, they still can't show the behavior fully,
so in a wild type environment, these hens would be out showing foraging
behavior which is specking out and scratching out the dirt and the earth
floor in order to find food particles. Now in this situation, they can only show
it in a very limited area and, as I said earlier, that food will quickly disappear,
so most of the hens that come to show the behavior don't have anything to find
when they show pecking and scratching. [SOUND] So this is the nest box
end of the furnished cage and it's a little dark and gloomy here but
it's supposed to be because we want the nest box area to be a bit more dark
and secluded from the rest of the cage. Then you can see on the side of the cage
here there are some plastic strips that are hanging down. The hens can push through the plastic
strips so they can get into the nest box, but those strips help keep the light
from penetrating an nest box. And then this particular design,
the front of the nest box is solid. Again, that stops the light
getting into the nest box and then if we look into a nest box itself, the floor of an nest box is
different from the rest of the cage. It's not just a plain wire. In this case it's overlaid
with a plastic mat and that gives the hens a more comfortable
place to sit and lay her eggs. So we're in a commercial
furnished cage unit here and it's a very different scale to the one
we saw a little earlier in this MOOC. A commercial unit like this would
typically have four sheds and we're standing in one of them. And within that shed, there will be seven banks of cages and
we're standing between two banks here. Now, in a bank in this particular house,
there are ten tiers of cages and we're standing on sort of a second floor
with the top five beside us and above us and the cages are 22 or
rather the bank is 22 cages long. So that means in this one shed alone, given that each cage
holds typically 80 birds. That there are more than 123,000
hens in this one shed and there are four of them on this farm. Now, much like the cages we saw earlier. The furnishings are the same. They still have to fulfill
the legal requirement, so everyone of these cages has 15cm
of purchased space per hen. It has a 12cm of feet space and
it has a nest box and a scratching area. We'll look at some of them
specifically in a moment. But something that's important to point
out about this unit is that although the floorprint of the building is
fairly small, because we can put birds in cages one above one another, it means
we really have used good use of space. And we can hold a lot of
animals in this one building. Now if these hens were
all kept free range, we would need a lot more
space to keep them. And this is really driven
by egg marketing demand. So, people like to eat a lot of eggs,
so we need to keep a lot of hens. Now because the way the egg market's
working at the moment, these cages, although they house 80 birds
per cage at the moment, they're only stocked at
about 85% of their capacity. And that's because the demand for
caged eggs is a little lower than normal. And that just means that the hens in
here have a bit more space than they would normally. And perhaps in the next flock they'll
be up to 100% stocking density. One of the advantages to a cage
system is that the laying hens are separated from their dropping. So, it means that the risk of them
getting infected with parasites or getting diseases is reduced, because the
animals are separated from their feces. Another advantage to this system, which is
in part affected by that reduced incidence of disease, is that mortality is low. In a typical furnished
cage system like this one, mortality would only be about 2%. So much like the furnished
cage system we saw earlier, we have have a scratch mat here. And in this case, it's here in
about the middle of the cage and the food comes out of the food
trough through a hole and will go on to the scratch mat where the
birds can peck at it and scratch at it. Now the layout of this cage design is
a little different to the one we looked at earlier. The perches, this time, go front to back. But the nest box is, again,
up one end of the cage where it's darkest. Because these cages are much bigger than
the ones we saw earlier, there's actually a nest box at this end, to my left, and
also one down past me to the right. And this cage is also twice as deep as
the cage system we saw earlier because it needs to hold a lot more hens. This is a fully automated system, so
as the eggs are laid, they roll out of the nest box and onto this egg belt,
where they're gradually transported to the egg elevator at the end where they'll
be sent on to the packing station. So regardless of the type of
housing system that a hen lives in, after about one year in her production
housing system her productivity and shell quality start to decline and so
hens will go through one of two processes. In some cases the hens will be put through
a molt and this were hens are feed a very low energy diet to make them
lose about half their body weight. And as a consequence they stop laying and
then they're allowed to recover. The quality of their diet is increased. And they regrow the feathers
that have dropped out, which is why it's called a molt,
and they come back in to lay. And this improves the quality of the shell
while maintaining the big egg size. And the hens will be be
kept after the molt for a few more months to
produce these big eggs. In other cases, after about a year of
production the hen is sent away for depopulation. So that's when the house is emptied and
the hens are transported for slaughter. So what are some of the common welfare
problems that laying hens will experience? Well a common cause of death for laying hens from all types of
housing systems is egg peritonitis. This is a condition where the egg is
laid internally and becomes infected and unfortunately, unless
the hen can be identified and treated, then normally she will die. Another cause of suffering
is bone fracture. Laying hens are rather fragile animals
because we're asking them to produce an egg a day. And the egg shell is
formed in part by calcium. And that has to come from
the bone structure of the bird. As a consequence,
the bird is often fairly osteoporotic. Her bones are quite fragile and so she is likely to cause herself injury when
she bumps into things like perches or cage furniture or furniture in the house
such as nest boxes and drinkers. [NOISE]