I'm Gemma Pearson. I'm one of the resident equine vets
here at the Dick Vet Equine Hospital. And my main interests are equine
behavior and equine medicine. Horses are very basic creatures generally. They want to be able to
socialize with other horses, they want to be able to be free to move
around, and obviously they need to be kept in a reasonable environment and
with reasonable feeding. So their diet, they're designed
to eat hay, haylage, and grass. They're not designed to eat a lot of
the concentrated feeds that people seem to give them a lot of nowadays. From a veterinary viewpoint, one of the biggest problems
we see is obesity in horses. A lot of people think that horses should
look a little bit rounder than they actually do. As you know,
one of my interests is equine behavior. And I think we see a lot of
welfare problems in that aspect, simply because people don't
understand truly how horses learn. And from that, they're unable
to train horses effectively. So they resort to using bigger bits, spurs, different gadgets and things for
control or for improved performance. Whereas if they understand how
horses learn a little bit better, they can change the training
methods to accompany that. What's really important to horses is
that whenever you put pressure on them, whenever they give you the right response,
you should then release that pressure. And if you do that then horses will
respond to lighter and lighter pressures, and we'll never need bigger bits or bigger
spurs or martingales to tie the head down. If, on the other hand, the pressure's
never released when these horses give the correct response, then eventually
you end up using increased pressures. From a physical point of view,
you can actually see pain and bruising and lacerations and things inflicted
through harsher bits, through increased spur pressure on the horses side if
they've been habituated to light pressure. We will also see horses that are in
discomfort because of restrictive tack. But then also from a psychological view,
we'll see horses which show stress levels, perhaps increased cortisol
which is a stress hormone, simply because they have some
confusions in their ridden work. Horses are designed to move, they're not
designed to be confined within a stable. And it wouldn't be acceptable nowadays to
keep a rabbit in a very small hutch or a dog in a very small kennel and
only take the dog out for a 10 or 15 or 20 minute walk each day. Whereas with horses we do still
see this with some horses. So I think it's important that horses are
allowed to exercise and socialize freely. Certainly in the UK, most people want to look after
the horses really well nowadays. And sometimes we almost care too much,
dare I say it. So certainly in the instance of obesity,
if we want to say that I want to say thank you for doing something,
I'll often take you out for a meal. We like to reward people with food,
and we do the same with horses. [SOUND] We also see examples
of where horses will whinny, they get quite excited if
some one brings them food, so people often see that as horses
loving them if they give them food. I think we also want to
treat horses like humans. So, as you're aware,
we live here in Scotland, it's quite cold, and I can think of nothing
nicer in the winter than being tucked up in my house with a nice big
fleece jumper on and being nice and warm. Whereas horses are not designed like that. A horse would much rather be
out in a field somewhere. No, I understand there are some horses
which are a bit older or thinner or whatever that might not want to be out
there in the driving rain the whole time. But, for the most part, horses don't
mind cold weather like we do, and they usually don't need as many
rooks as people want to put on them. I think understand that horses
are meant to be horses. Try and look at how horses are designed
to live in their natural environment, and try to mimic that as much
as is reasonably possible. And then, please try and have some
understand as to how horses learn and think about how we can incorporate
that into their training.