So last year, world production of broiler chicken meat
was 85 million tons of chicken meat. That's a lot of chicken. In developing countries such as China and India, the demand for poultry products is
increasing, so broiler chicken production is likely to continue to rise for
the foreseeable future. Almost 18 million broiler chicks
are placed on UK farms every week. That is a lot of chickens
being produced in the UK. The broiler chick starts off as a 42
gram bird when it's first hatches. And in just 6 weeks,
by the time it goes to slaughter, it can reach a weight of about 3000 grams,
or 3 kilos. That means that the bird has increased
its body weight 70 times in the 6 short weeks before it goes for slaughter. If we compare that to
the growth of a beef calf, for example, when a beef calf is first born,
it weighs 40 kilograms. If it grew at the same
rate as a broiler chicken, making its growth body weight
increase by 70 times in 6 weeks, then it would reach 2800 kilograms
of beef in just 6 weeks time. So as you can probably guess, the broiler chicken is the fastest
growing animal on the planet. So meat chickens are very efficient at
converting their food that they eat into muscle mass which is
the chicken meat that we eat. And the reason this has happened is
because over the past 60 years or so, breeding companies have been selecting for
high food conversion ratios and also inadvertently they've been selecting
for the chickens to be rather inactive. And the combination of these two
things means that the broiler chicken deposit a lot of muscle mass in
a very short period of time. Boiler chicks are handled
in a very similar manner to the layer chicks that we
were talking about earlier. They're artificially incubated as eggs,
they hatch. They're transferred under warm
conditions to the rearing farm where they're provided with supplementary
heat for the first two weeks or so until they can self-regulate
their own body temperature. But the similarities really end there. So we're going to focus on
broiler production systems now. But I'm only gonna talk
about conventional rearing. Because the other forms of rearing,
such as free range and organic, only make up less than 5%
of broiler production in the UK. So, in some broiler rearing, some places might rear broilers in cages,
but that's comparatively rare in Europe. In European systems,
we tend to rear birds in deep litter, so it's this kind of
wood shavings material or something similar that birds can sit
on and be fairly comfortable on. A typical broiler shed might
hold anywhere between 25 and 50,000 broiler chickens in
a football field style shed. Big open spans. With lots of feeders and drinkers down so
the birds can help themselves to food and water during the whole course of the day. The lights would typically be on for
about 18 hours. By European rules,
they have to have 6 hours of darkness. And the space allowance will
be anything between 33 and 42 kilograms of chicken per
square meter of floor space. What that refers to is the terminal
stocking density that the birds will be at just before they're taken away for
slaughter. So at a stocking density of up to
33 kilograms per square meter, the producer has to meet basic EU
requirements of meat chicken production. However, EU regulations require that
the producer meets increasingly stricter requirements for keeping birds at
stocking densities of between 33 and 39 kilograms per square meter, or between
39 and 42 kilograms per square meter. Of course other poultry standards can
stipulate lower stocking densities, and these for indoor reared birds. Some indoor reared broilers may also
be housed with things to enrich the environment. So, for example, they might be provided
with natural daylight from windows, or bales of hay, or straw, or
bales of wood shavings to peck at. And they can also sit on these of course. They might also have perches. And they could have whole grains scattered
into the litter or vegetables to peck at. Furthermore, free range chicken production
will have additional requirements such a minimum rearing age of eight
weeks and access to range for at least half of their lifetime. A free range production scheme such
as freedom foods will have additional requirements such as stocking density of
no more than 27 and a half kilograms per square meter and a range area of at
least one square meter per bird. So what sort of welfare problems
do broiler chickens suffer from? Well most problems stem from
their rapid growth rate. So for example one of the major concerns
over rapidly growing meat chickens, is their inability to walk normally
after about two to three weeks of age. And this is possibly due to one or
more of the following factors. So one of these issues is
just plain body confirmation. If you look at a broiler, they're
depositing a lot of breast muscle mass, and this will cause their body shape to
alter compared to a non-selective chicken, making the dynamics of
walking just different for them compared to a bird that is slimmer. There's also the issue
of skeletal mechanics. The increased weight that a rapidly
growing chicken has to support on undeveloped legs,
may cause altering of the bone shape. And while this may not necessarily
cause the bird discomfort, it may alter their walking style. And then finally, there's a possibility that birds
are suffering from painful pathologies. So some forms of leg weakness
are caused by infection, or conditions that are likely to be painful,
which can make a bird walk poorly as it attempts not to bear so
much weight on the sore limb. Conditions such as femoral head necrosis
or synovitis are likely to be painful. Towards the latter stages
of their production, broilers can experience heat stress,
which they exhibit by panting and holding their wings away from their
body in an attempt to cool themselves. This is caused by their high metabolic
rate, which generates a lot of heat, and the birds then struggle to
dissipate this extra heat, particularly as the floor is becoming
more crowded with other growing chickens. This can be reduced by
thinning the flock out and taking some of the chickens
away earlier than others for slaughter, which then allows
the remaining birds to spread out. It could also be diminished
by slowing their growth rate. In addition,
broiler chickens can be exposed to pathogens just like their
laying hen counterparts can. And the risk can be greater
with free range systems. So, next what I wanna talk to you about
is the parents of broiler chickens, and should we be considering their welfare
when we think about the progeny, the actual production animal. The parents stock of broilers
are known as broiler breeders. Their dilemma arises when they still have
the growth potential of their progeny, but if we allow them to grow
at the same rapid rate, eating ad libitum from
the time they hatched, then they would become obese and they
would probably produce poor quality eggs. And a lot of them wouldn't reach
sexual maturity because they would die prematurely. So in order to prevent this and
ensure that we rear robust, healthy adult breeder chickens, the amount
of food that they eat during their rearing phase is limited to a small ration of
food, which they feed on once a day. Now in some countries they do something
called skip a day feeding, and they get a bigger portion of food,
but only every second day. And restricting them in this way means
that for the females at least, at 6 weeks of age they should only reach a target
weight of a little less than 700 grams. And remember that we said earlier
that a 6-week old broiler chick could get to as much as 3,000 grams. And that by the time they reach
adulthood at about 20 weeks of age, they'll weight a little under
2,200 grams or 2.2 kilos. The benefits of restricting for
the breeders in this way, is that they grow up to be robust,
healthy and active birds, but the draw backs are that the birds
may show signs of chronic hunger. For example, by expressing high
levels of foraging activity, by showing escape behavior from their
home pens, and by physiological indicators of stress such as increased
levels of corticosterone and AGRP. So that's a brief tour of laying hen and
broiler welfare. I hope you've enjoyed what
you've learned here, and I hope you enjoy the rest of your course.