Welcome to Unit 4 of
Writing in the Sciences. So far in this course, we've talked
about how to write better sentences and better paragraphs. In the first module of this unit, we're going to practice those skills
by editing several paragraphs. I want you to test yourself, so I'm
going to ask you to pause the video and try editing the exercises on your own. And then you can restart the video,
and I'll walk you through my edits. Last week, we talked about experimenting
with punctuation using the semi colon, the dash, the parentheses and the colon. And just in case you're still
feeling a little bit timid about using that kind of exotic punctuation
in your Scientific article. I saw this week an article in Nature
Physics which has an impact factor of 19, it's a great journal. This was written by two physicists,
and notice, I pulled out one of their paragraphs. Notice that they very much used the
semicolon, dash, colon and parentheses. So here's one example paragraph,
I'm not going to read it. I'll let you kind of read it on your own. But you can see that it's very effective. It's a very clear and
well written article. They use these punctuation
marks effectively, and it is okay to use them and
it's even encouraged to use them. And they also have a whimsical title for
their article, which is always nice. So now let's jump right in to
the exercises for this module. Again, I want you to test
yourself a little bit. So I'll kind of give you some
guidance on each of these paragraphs. And then I'm going to ask you to pause
the video and edit it on your own. So each of the paragraphs that I've
picked for this module, I try to pick things that don't require a lot of
technical background or too much context. So that everybody should
be able to edit them. So, I'm not going to bother to
read through the entire paragraph, because you can read it on your own. But this first paragraph's basically
telling you a taxonomy about some different terms that
are used when we talk about measuring the quality of instruments. So I want you to read through it and edit
it, keeping in mind that you're trying to put into play all of these different
tools that I have given you. So kind of try to cut a lot
of unnecessary clutter, get it down to the heart of the matter. So why don't you pause the video now. And when you are done editing,
then go ahead and restart the video, and I'll go through my edits on this. All right, so hopefully you came up with
a nice solid edit on that paragraph. When I was editing that, the first thing I kind of ask myself
is just what's the paragraph about? What's the idea contained
in that paragraph? So what the authors are trying to convey
is this taxonomy of these different terms used to assess the quality
of an instrument. And it's kind of a complicated paragraph. It's a little bit boring, right,
because it's just about terms, which is never the most
interesting thing to read. And actually my first instinct
when I read that paragraph was to put everything in a table. And you can imagine that this paragraph,
rather than being in prose, this information could have actually
probably been better presented as a table, or even a nice little tree diagram. So there are a lot of instances, and you should be aware of them,
watch out for them. Where it might be better to
put something in a figure, rather than to put it in prose. It just lends itself better to a figure. So but this is like, I came up with,
I put in the little table. So we have, kind of, the domains,
that's the highest level. Then we get the sub-level of
measurement property, and then below that we have aspect. And here's how all those
terms fill that in. So then I kind of used that framework
to help myself edit this paragraph. And hopefully, you came up with something
that was similarly short, right? We don't need a lot of words
to give this taxonomy. So I've pared it down to, we assess each
instrument based on reliability, validity, and responsiveness. These domains may be subdivided
into measurement properties. Reliability includes these
three measurement properties. Validity includes these other three. And responsiveness is both a domain and
a measurement property. So they had a kind of long spiel in
the original where they were explaining. Well, it's kind of actually funny,
I'm going to scroll back to it here. They were saying well, but for
reasons of clarity, the domain and the measurement property
have the same name. And I was thinking, well that actually
makes it more confusing to me, not more clear. But anyway, I kind of pared down
that whole discussion by just saying the responsiveness is both a domain and
a measurement property. And I would go to the next level, some measurement properties
additionally contain multiple aspects. For example, construct validity
includes structural validity, hypothesis testing and
cross cultural validity. So moving on to the second exercise,
this one is actually two paragraphs long. But I'm going to encourage you to try to
think of a way to bring it together into a single paragraph, because I think it actually probably
only lends itself to one paragraph. So this was from a study where they
were looking at church records. And this is from their method section. They're trying to tell you a little about
those records, where they came from and what information is in them. So, again, it's two paragraphs long. I just want to draw your
attention to the very last line. I'm not going to read
through the whole thing. You can read through it on your own. But the very last line of the second
paragraph, it's kind of funny, so. It says when a member dies and
the clerk reports his or her death to the Church Membership Council,
the membership record is updated and then archived in the church's
deceased membership file. So notice that you're reading that along, it sounds like it's the membership file,
it's the file that's deceased, right? So it has this kind of funny
thing with adjectives. So you want to be careful with adjectives, because you can come up with
funny things like deceased files. So obviously you're going to want to
edit that last line carefully. So why don't you go ahead and I'm going to
put both of the paragraphs up on a single slide so
you can have them at your fingertips. Why don't you now go ahead and
pause the video, edit both paragraphs. And then when you're done,
restart the video, and I'll kind of walk you through my edits. All right, so hopefully you were able
to get it down to a single paragraph. So when I was editing this,
I asked myself, what's the main idea, the main point of these paragraphs? And so what I think the main point was,
is that they were just trying to get across that the information
that they used for their study, which was from the church records,
that it was accurate and reliable. And notice in the original version,
they used those terms, accurate and reliable several times. They use the term accuracy many times. So I was able to pare it down by kind of
taking away some of the repetition. So I want to scroll back and
just kind of point this out to you. So in the original two paragraphs,
they say in the very first sentence, it is a high level of accuracy. They give you a reference for that. Then they try and give you some details
about how this works to kind of verify that indeed it is accurate. And then, in the second paragraph, they
go back to talking a lot about accuracy. While the accuracy is dependent, each member can review the record
once a year to check it for accuracy. For this reason, and
because the church emphasizes accurate record keeping the information
is quite reliable. So they're repeating those words
accurate and reliable quite a bit. So what I did was just say well, that's kind of the point
of all of this information. The main point is just to say that hey,
these records are accurate and reliable. They have a citation for that, there's
somebody who's done a study on that. They also want to back it up by just
explaining how this whole thing works. The other point of this paragraph
is to get across a little bit of information about exactly
what's in those records. And that's important because that tells
you what information they had to them for this particular health study. So going back to my edited version, I just
said I got it started with the church's record-keeping system is accurate and
reliable. And now, I'm going to go through and tell you a little bit of details about how
it works and what information is in there. When a new member is baptized, the church
congregation creates a member record that includes, notice the use of a colon. Name, date of birth,
parents' names, current address and dates of church ordinances. Now it's important that it's
a lay clerk who does all this. But we don't like to keep
repeating the term lay clerk. So we can say a lay clerk enters these
records into the general church database, and updates them to reflect
dates of ordinances. That can all be in one sentence. New ordinances, spouse name,
changes of address, and date of death. And then that whole second
paragraph was about this idea that the members could review their
membership records once a year, and somehow that was going
to improve accuracy. Notice how I shorten that
to a single sentence. The reason I did that is,
if you go again back to the original and look at that second paragraph. It's all about the members being able
to review their records once a year. Well, if you think about that carefully,
it says that each member has an opportunity to review their membership
record once a year to check it for accuracy. That's actually fairly ambiguous,
so there's a lot of words here, but with a great amount of ambiguity
about what's actually happening. So when you say, they have an opportunity
to review their membership. Does that mean that they have just
one opportunity, they're limited? They can only review the records once,
but they're allowed to review it once. Or does it mean that they're encouraged
to review their records every year? Or is it more passive where
they just could review it, should they feel the need to review it? So there's a lot of ambiguity here. And adding all these extra details and words here doesn't help
address any of that ambiguity. So I pared that down to a single sentence. And then that last sentence
about when a member dies, we don't need to know that it's reported
to the church membership council. Because what we care about
here are the records, that's what we're using for the study. So we can get rid of a lot
of extra details here. It's really not that important
who's doing the reporting and who's archiving the records. We already know it's the lay clerk
who's keeping track of these things. So I just pared that down to when a member
dies, the membership record is archived. So you can get this down quite a bit. Hopefully, you were able to
get something similarly short. Notice that the last sentence,
I allowed that to be in the passive voice. So when a member dies,
the membership record is archived. Notice there's no subject. I didn't bother to say, well, it was
the lay clerk who did the archiving or the council member. because I didn't think
it was that important. So as I've alluded to before, in
the methods section where this was from, sometimes it's okay to have something in
the passive voice when it doesn't really matter who did it. And when it's more important to
just get across what was done. So sometimes in the methods section, it's
actually okay to use the passive voice. And I think it's probably a good
use of the passive voice here. All right, so for
the last exercise in this practice module, I'm going to have you read a paragraph. This was from a study where they found an association between childhood
misbehavior and subsequent drug use. So they actually saw some behavior,
bad behavior kids. And they followed them over time, and found later that they had
a higher risk of drug use. So I want you to go ahead, pause
the video, read through this paragraph, edit it. And then when you're done,
restart the video. And I will go over my thoughts
on this paragraph with you. All right, so hopefully you got
a good edit of this paragraph. And I want to point out one thing
in particular about this paragraph. So you might have noticed,
when you were reading it along that, that word however was a little bit funny. Did that, I wonder if that struck
some of you as you were reading it. So you get a bunch of sentences
that are about studies that also shown this link between childhood
misbehavior and drug use. And other studies on adults that have
shown an association between aggressive or bad behavior and drug use. So you get this information about
prior studies finding a similar link. But then you get a total shift in ideas. And the authors kind of understood and
realized that they were making a shift. So they threw in the word however there. But that's actually not
an appropriate use of however. It sounds funny because it's a little off,
right? That however is supposed to tell you it's contrasting
something in the previous sentence. Well this is not, it's just their
signal that they're changing ideas. So if you're changing ideas, instead of
throwing in any random transition word, what you actually want to do, of course,
is break this into two paragraphs. I'm hoping that a lot of you caught this, that there's actually two ideas
going on in this paragraph. The first is, here's all these other
studies that confirm my results. They have found the same thing as us. And the second part of this paragraph, which should be its own
separate paragraph, is what is the possible mechanism,
the pathway that explains our finding? So you, hopefully, separated that into
two paragraphs, that's one option. And actually the other option, I'll show
you both, I did both edits is actually to realize that maybe some of the material
on previous studies is not even relevant. And we could even delete that,
and make this into one paragraph. So I want to show you kind of
both ways that I approached it. So here was my rewrite where I separated
the ideas into two paragraphs. So I separated the previous studies
from the pathways, the mechanisms. And I shortened things, I did some
editing here, additional editing. Previous studies have linked early
childhood conduct with problems with subsequent drug use. Studies have also found that young
adult and adult drug users exhibit more aggressive, unconventional, and
impulsive behaviors than their peers. So I changed that around a little bit,
because I think the young adult and adult studies,
it wasn't very clear in the original. But I think what they were saying
was that there are studies that show that these things co-occur,
the aggressive, bad behavior co-occurs
with drug use in adults. Now those studies actually
don't tell you whether or not the aggressive behavior
causes the drug use. Or whether the drug use causes
the aggressive or unconventional behavior. So we don't really know
from those studies. And also those studies
are all about adults, when the study that we're dealing
with here is one about children. So maybe the fact that studies on adults
find this association is relevant here. But I actually thought that perhaps
it isn't even really that relevant. They did a study on
childhood conduct problems. And they linked it prospectively to
subsequent drug use where the cause is really aggressive behavior clearly
comes before the drug use. Those other studies don't have, we don't
really know the direction of causality. They're also all about adults,
which isn't really relevant here. because we're talking about children. So one option you'll see in my next way
that I edit it in my next slide is that you could actually delete all that
information about the adult studies. But, for now, I left it in there if
they wanted to get that point in there. Then I broke off into
the second paragraph. Several pathways may explain our finding. Aggressive children may have
underlying psychiatric disorders or cognitive disabilities that
increase their risk of drug use. Misbehavior tends to
co-occur with impulsivity, which increases the risk of drug use. And childhood misbehavior may lead to
long-term problems such as persistent distress. Or a failure to ever adopt
conventional roles or behaviors, which may lead to drug dependence. Now notice that second paragraph is
actually only one single sentence. I've used a colon and a list there. That's perfectly okay, I tried to also
clear up a little bit of connections which maybe were a little bit confusing
in the original example. So, hopefully, you were able to make that
example a little bit shorter, crisper, and a little bit clearer. Here's the other alternative
that you could've done, is you could've just deleted all of
those adult studies as I mentioned. And just have the whole paragraph
be about the childhood studies. And then you're basically
saying previous studies have linked childhood conduct
problems with subsequent drug use. And here are all the pathways that may
explain the link that they found as well as what we found. They also found the same
link in their study. So we can do it that way. So either of those edits
is perfectly fine. But I'm hoping you recognize that there
is this change of ideas in the middle of that paragraph. And I just want to give
a quick acknowledgement here. I want to thank Gary Friedman
of Stanford University. He's been a long-time advocate of
improving the quality of writing in scientific papers. And he's a fantastic editor himself, and
actually provided me with a whole treasure trove of examples, some of which have
found their way into this course.