Welcome to Unit 5 of
Writing in the Sciences. This week, I'm going to walk you through
how to write a scientific manuscript. Before we jump into the scientific
manuscript, however, I do want to briefly continue our discussion from last
week on the writing process. I want to give you one more tip
on avoiding procrastination and easing anxiety around writing. First of all,
writing is hard for everyone. I get intimidated and
anxious when I have a big story to write, especially when I haven't
gotten started yet. One thing I do to ease my anxiety
is to break the writing up and set very reasonable goals for each day. As I'm driving into work, I might tell myself,
my goal today is just to write 400 words. If I can make 400 words,
I will have had a successful day. I choose a goal that I know is easy,
it's so reasonable and doable that it doesn't seem daunting. It doesn't make me feel like crawling
under my desk and curling up in a ball. This makes it easier to get started
on the writing that day, and what usually happens is, I reach my goal in
a few hours, and by then, I'm on a roll. I feel on track because I've met my goal,
and I'm able to keep going and
get a lot more done that day. But it's comforting for me to know in the
back of my mind that if, for some reason, the writing ends up being really tough
that day, and I can only get to 400 words, I can still call that a success. If you set goals too high, like forcing yourself to try to whip
out the entire manuscript in one day. This can be so daunting and unrealistic,
that it makes it hard to even get started, and you'll end up procrastinating and get
nothing done, so set small, doable goals. Now on to scientific manuscripts, I recommend that you
write them in this order. I believe that you need to nail
your tables and figures down first. Don't just put together some shell
tables or something rough, but come up with a beautiful,
polished set of tables and figures. The tables and
figures contain the story of your paper. Each table and
figure should have a clear point, and together, they should tell
the story of your manuscript. So the first thing that you need
to do is to figure out that story that your tables and
figures are going to tell. And finalize those tables and
figures, make them look professional. Once you have a complete set of tables and
figures, the results section falls right out of these, so
you should write the results next. The results section just gives a high
level summary of each table and figure, so it's easy to write results if you've
done the tables and figures well. Next, I suggest writing the methods,
you could actually write this at any time, because it's just a play-by-play
of what you did, but I think it makes most
sense to write it third. Then, you should write
the introduction section. I think it's important to nail down the
story of your manuscript in the tables, figures, and results first,
before you write the introduction, because that helps you to know
how to frame the introduction. Next, you should write the discussion
section, that's, of course, the hardest to write, because it involves
the most writing, it's the most complex. But having written the rest of
the manuscript at this point, it makes it easier to know
what to put in the discussion. Finally, always do your abstract last,
abstract means to pull out. You are pulling out bits and
pieces of the other sections, so it's much easier to write after you've
already done the other sections. So this is the order I recommend
writing manuscripts in, and I'm going to go over the sections in
this order in my lectures for this week. If you want to do some further reading,
I've given you two references on the page here, and I'm going to be citing these two
sources throughout the modules this week. First, there's a great series
in Clinical Chemistry. It goes through all the parts
of the scientific manuscript and you don't need to be a chemist
to benefit from these, really these articles apply
to any scientific discipline. It's a very well done and
easy to read series. If you want to longer, more comprehensive
reference, I recommend Mimi Zeiger's textbook, the Essentials of
Writing Biomedical Research Papers. That's a comprehensive textbook
with lots of practice exercises, it's especially useful for
those in biomedicine. In the first module for this unit, we're
going to talk about tables and figures. In a lot of ways, the tables and figures are the most important
part of the manuscript. One big mistake that scientists
make is they do the tables and figures kind of haphazardly. They just kind of thow the data into
the tables without much thought. You need to think through those tables and figures very carefully, because they
form the foundation of your story. Editors, reviewers, and readers may
look at the tables and figures first. When I get a paper to review, I skim
the abstract just to get a sense of what the paper's about, and then I jump
right to the tables and figures. I want to look at the data for myself before I read
the author's take on their data. This means that the tables and figures have to be able to stand alone,
they have to be self-contained. The reader should not need to refer
back to the text to make sense of them. Acronyms have to be defined,
experimental details need to be defined. Also, each figure and
table has to tell a clear story, and they should progress in that
story from one to the next. Each table and
figure should make a clear point, and as you're creating the tables and figures,
you should know what that point is, and you should try to stick to
that point as much possible. Some people would go so far as to say that
the tables and figures are the crux of the manuscript, and the writing
around them is just window dressing. I picked out a quote here that's
specifically about computational science, but just substitute the word data for
the word software here. He says, an article about computational
science in a scientific publication isn't the scholarship itself, it's
merely advertising of the scholarship. The actual scholarship is the complete
software development environment and the complete set of instructions
which generated the figure. In the same vein, you could say
that the data in your tables and figures is the scholarship, is the story,
and the writing around the tables and figures is just advertising for them. A couple of tips on tables and
figures, first of all, you want to use the fewest figures and
tables needed to tell the story. Just as in writing prose,
you want to be concise and to the point. Plus, scientific journals may have
limits on the numbers of tables and figures that you're allowed to submit. Second, don't repeat the same
data in both a table and a figure, choose to present
that data as one or the other. One of the decisions you're
going to have to make is, which data belong in a table and
which data belong in a figure. What's the difference? Figures should have a visual impact. So if you have data that
lends itself to a nice, visually appealing graphic,
think about putting it in a figure. Figures are used to show trends and
patterns, figures also tell a quick story. So if there's a single big point that
you want to get across to your readers, that's another thing to put in a figure. I like figures because they can give
more information about the data. So if you want to show
all of your data points, rather than just giving summary
statistics, for example. Or if you want to show the distribution or
range of the data, a figure works well for that. People also use figures to
highlight the most important result of their paper because, again,
Figures are visually appealing, and they can grab the reader's attention. So if there's a specific
result you want to emphasize, consider putting that in a figure. Tables are used to give precise values. In a figure, you don't usually convey the
precise value down to the decimal place. So if you think those
precise values are important, you need to put them in a table. And of course, if you have many values
with many variables that you need to display, a table is better for
displaying a lot of information. Now let's talk about the format of tables. Every table has a title, which should
identify the specific topic or point of a table. Remember, every table tells a story, and the title should give a quick
synopsis of that story. Be sure to repeat the same
key terms in the table title, the column headings of the table,
and in the main text of the paper. Be consistent, so
that you don't confuse your reader. Remember, it's okay to repeat
keyword you want to repeat them, so that your reader doesn't get confused. You also want to keep the table title
concise, an example title would be descriptive characteristics of the two
treatment groups, and then means, plus or minus, standard deviation or N percent. This tells the reader the point of
the table to describe the two groups, and let's them know what statistics to expect. Tables also have footnotes, and different
journals have different rules for what symbols to use for footnotes. Some journals might use stars,
whereas others might use letters, A, B, C. Don't try to guess. When you are starting to
build your tables and figures, identify the journal that
you plan to submit the paper to. And then pick up a published
article from that journal, and copy the footnote symbols
used in the example. Each journal has its own
set of guidelines, and the best way to figure out those
guidelines is either to read the author's instructions that the journal puts out,
or even easier, just pull a paper from that journal and
copy the format in their published papers. If you're using footnotes to indicate
statistically significant differences, make sure to be clear about exactly
what comparisons were made, which groups were compared, and
what statistical test was used. Also use the footnotes to explain
experimental details or acronyms. Again, this table has to stand on its own. So any acronyms or definitions, or measurement conventions have to
be defined within the table. The reader should not have to go
back to the text to look those up. In formatting tables, there are a ton of
little decision points you have to make, like, do I capitalize
the variable names in the table? Do I flush them left or center? Do I use italics? Where do I put the footnotes? What are the footnote symbols? Don't guess, don't try to reinvent the
wheel and make all this up from scratch. Just go pull a published paper from
the journal you are targeting, and copy what you see there. Every journal has its own
set of style guidelines. You might as well make your tables look
like other published papers in the journal you're targeting. Reviewers and editors are impressed, when they see professional looking
tables in the journals style. Another thing to keep in mind is that
the convention for most journals, is that tables contain just
three horizontal lines. One above the column headings,
one below the columns heading, and one below the data. A lot of people are unaware of this, so
they put in many more lines than this, and it ends up looking unprofessional. Here's an example table
with some made up data. When my daughter was two,
the Wizard of Oz was her favorite movie. And there's a line in that movie
where the good witch asks Dorothy, Are you a bad witch or a good witch? So they have Bad Witches and
Good Witches in Oz. So I made up some pretend data
on Bad Witches and Good Witches. In my hypothetical study, I have 13
Bad Witches, and 12 Good Witches. I've measured their descriptive
characteristics, and put it into a descriptive table, which is your
typical table one for a medical study. This is what a typical table looks like. Notice the three horizontal lines. One above the column headings,
one below the column headings, and one below the data before the footnotes. That's how most journals
format their tables. Notice that this table
has a simple clear point to compare the two groups of witches. And we can quickly glean what's
different about the two groups. Bad witches are older, less healthy,
and somewhat less employed. Some journals will also gray out every
other row to help readers distinguish one row from the next. Notice there are still just those
three horizontal lines, but the shading helps guide the readers eyes. This also looks very professional. Now I'm going to show you some things that
you should avoid doing in your tables. Okay, first of all, I mentioned earlier the importance
of getting grid lines correct. You should have just those
three horizontal lines. Here's a table in which they have
included all of the grid lines. And it might seem like a minor point, but the problem is that the table
looks unprofessional. This is not how tables appear in journals. I make a big point of this
with my students at Stanford, because I've reviewed many,
many papers over the years. And at some point I noticed that
papers with tables like this, with all the grid lines, tend to have
lots of problems elsewhere in the paper. Maybe using all the grid lines like
this is more common among new authors, who don't have much
paper-writing experience, or maybe it's just a mark
of general sloppiness. But I noticed this correlation between
the presence of the grid lines and problems elsewhere in the paper. So when I flip the tables to the tables
and I see all those grid lines, there's a red flag that
goes off in my head. I automatically expect that the paper
is going to have other problems. I suspect that other reviewers and editors
have formed the same association in their heads, either consciously or
unconsciously. And I've actually had several students
come back to me after taking my course and say, that they started
noticing this association between the presences of all the grid
lines and poor quality papers. So you don't want to make this mistake,
because it's a red flag for reviewers and editors. It might seem like a trivial thing,
but it signals to reviewers and editors that your paper is sloppy and
unprofessional. Always take the time to get
those grid lines right. Figure out in your word processing program
how to get rid of the extra grid lines. Make your tables look professional. Another thing that doesn't look
professional is, if your columns and data are misaligned. You can see here that items in
the columns are not lined up nicely. They don't usually look as bad as this. I've exaggerated for effect here. But you'll often see numbers
that aren't perfectly lined up, especially when decimal
places are involved. I also have some words here
beginning with capitals, and others beginning with lower case,
I mixed it up. This inconsistency,
also looks unprofessional. This kind of sloppiness, makes a big
negative impression on reviewers and editors, so take the time to make
your tables look professional. Another problem I see
with a lot of tables, is people love to go out to a ridiculous
number of significant figures. I think that's because if you put
something like age into your statistical analysis program, your computer will
spit out values, like the average age or the average BMI,
to several decimal places. And then people just cut and
past the value into their tables, without thinking about it. But we don't need to know BMI
to the third decimal place, and it just clutter's the table. Plus, we may not have measured BMI this. Precisely, you should only go out to as many decimals places as you
can claim as significant figures. So if you only measured BMI to one decimal
place, your summary statistics for BMI should not have more
than one decimal place. I generally recommend going out to
no more than one decimal place for clinical variables like age,
BMI, and exercise. So watch that number of
significant figures. Also, always give units for
the variables in your table. A lot of my students forget to include
units when listing variables like this. I think it's easy to forget the units
when, again, you're just cutting and pasting output from your
statistical analysis program. But the units are often ambiguous. For example, what does exercise mean here? Is that 30 minutes a day? Is that 30 minutes a week? Is that 60 minutes a year? Is that 60 hours a year? There's no way to tell
without having the units. Even age may seem obvious. You may assume that 45 and 36 is referring
to years here, but we don't know for sure. It could be months,
if we are talking about toddlers. So units are essential. Another mistake people make on tables
is to include too many columns. I had a nice, crisp table to begin with. It was easy to see that
the goal of the table was to compare bad witches and
good witches. It was easy to glean that bad
witches seemed to be older and less healthy than good witches. Adding extra columns just detracts
from this nice simple message. Here we have an overall column. That overall column is extra information that doesn't have to do
with the comparison. And if a reader really wanted
to know the overall value for some reason, they could calculate it
from the other data in the table. So it just adds clutter. Similarly, statistical significance can
be neatly indicated using subscripts and footnotes, as I did in the original table. The point of the p-values here
is just to flag statistically significant differences, which can
be done with a star and a footnote. There may be instances when it's
important to show the exact p-values for all the different variables. But I don't think that's the case here. Here, readers just need to be able
to quickly glean which variables differ significantly. Extra columns make
the table hard to read and detract from the main focus and
take-home message of the table. So get rid of them. All right, now moving on to figures. There are three types of figures
that we're going to talk about. First, there's what we
call primary evidence. That would be things like gels,
photographs, x-rays, micrographs, pathology slides. They're in there to show
the quality of the data. Also because there's a seeing
is believing element to these. If readers can see
the lines on the gel for themselves, they're more
confident in the results. Primary evidence is usually
pretty straightforward to create, because it's just pictures or movies. Second, there's graphs. These are graphical ways
of displaying your data. Things like line graphs,
bar graphs, and scatter plots. I'll talk more about these in a minute. Finally, there are drawings and diagrams. I don't think people use these enough,
actually. Drawings and diagrams are a bit
underused in the scientific literature. They have really nice uses. You can use them to do things like
illustrate an experimental setup or a workflow. Or to indicate the flow of
participants in your study. Or to illustrate cause and
effect relationships or cycles. Drawings and diagrams can convey
key information to the reader that might be quite tedious and
convoluted when written in prose. And sometimes it's nice you
can give a hypothetical model. Or it's nice to represent things that you
can't see, like microscopic particles or microorganisms. Sometimes it's helpful to
represent those as cartoons. That can be nice for the reader to have a visual of something
that they couldn't otherwise see. So I'm going to go through each of
these types of figures now in turn. Of course,
all your figures will have a legend. You need the legend so
that the figure can stand alone. It should have a brief, informative title
that conveys the main point of the figure. It should contain essential
experimental details so that the reader doesn't have to
go back and read the main text. You'll also have a legend to define
symbols, lines, or patterns, or to explain what's in different panels, if
you have like an A, B, C, D and E panel. Or you're going to need also to give
statistical detail such as what tests were used and where did those p-values
come from, what the p-values were. Here's an example of a figure legend. This is from a study that
found that tomato and Arabidopsis plants kind of eat
microbes such E coli bacteria. I'm not going to read through the legend. But you can see that it has
an informative title and sufficient experimental details that
that figure can stand on its own. This is the figure that goes with
the legend I just showed you. You'll notice there's a lot of
different panels in this figure. They also have some letters and
arrows in the panels. You'll notice all the little white arrows
and there are some letters like E, M, and R. All of this has to be
explained in the legend. This was a paper where they were showing
that plants actually eat microbes, like E coli. So that's a cool paper with
some very cool images. Those green parts are the E coli
being taken up by the plant roots. The plants are actually
eating the microbes. So this is primary evidence. It's showing you, hey, here it is. Here is the E coli in the plant roots. Seeing is believing. Here's another example of
primary evidence, a gel. You need to see those bands in
the gel to believe the results. So that's primary evidence. Next I'm going to jump to graphs. I could teach a whole course on graphs. You really need a whole course on data
visualization to do justice to this topic. And it's such an important topic that
I'd actually recommend that you do take a course in data
visualization in the future. But I'm going to give you
the five-minute version. Just to let you know the kinds
of graphs that are out there. Among the most common types of graphs are
line graphs, scatter plots, bar graphs, individual-value bar graphs, histograms,
box plots, and survival curves. I'm going to go through each of these. So line graphs show trends over time or trends over something that's increasing or
decreasing, like age or dose. Typically, we just graph the mean values
for each group at each time point. But if the study is very small, you could even show the trend lines for
individual people or individual animals. Just to give you an example, here's
a line graph that compares two groups. A treatment group, which is in green,
and a controlled group, which is in red. They are tracking what happens
to the number of positive cells as you increase the dose of DPI. This graph tells a quick story. Increasing DPI,
that's your x axis variable, doesn't seem to affect
the control group much. The red line's pretty flat. But you can see it causes the treatment
group to dip and then rebound. So it tells a quick visual story. The one thing that's a bit confusing
in this graph is I don't like the stars on top. These probably have to do with
statistical significance. But it's not immediately
obvious what they mean. Okay, bar graphs. Bar graphs are used to compare groups
at one time point or one dose. Everybody loves bar graphs because
they are easy to understand. They tell a quick visual story, and your reader doesn't have to do too
much work to understand a bar graph. So here are some examples. This was from that study looking
at tomato plants eating e coli. They have two controls and a treatment. And the treatment group
clearly takes up more e coli. They incorporate more of the microbes. Now, that's easy to glean from the graph. There are a few things I'm going to point
out on this graph that I would improve. For example, it's not immediately
clear to me what the a, b, and c mean. If possible, it's best to not make
the reader have to go to the legend to figure that out,
make it something more obvious. It's not also not terribly beautiful visually because they've
left the bars with white spaces. Usually, shading those bars
makes it a little bit nicer. So here's another example, this one's
a little bit visually appealing. Notice they've shaded the bars in gray. This graph also appears to
be at higher resolution. It's sharper and
crisper than the graph I just showed you. I also love the fact that they've
put the ends, the sample sizes, on each bar to indicate how
many are in each group. Normally, people leave
this information off. But it's so important for the reader
to have have that information at their fingertips that I love to see
it put on the graph like this. So this is a nice bar graph
that has a clear take on point. The outcome, averaged degree is increasing
over increasing concentrations. Next, scatter plots. Scatter plots are used to show
relationships between two variables, usually to continuous or
to numeric variables. I love scatter plots because
they show all the data. Most graphs and
tables just show summary statistics. But you don't get to see all
the individual data points. The scatter plot is great because
it shows everything about the data. It shows all the individual data points so
it gives you more information. It really gives the reader a sense
of what's going on in the data, instead of just giving one
perspective on the data. In a way, it shows all the dirty laundry. So I like scatter plots because you
can see those individual data points. Let me give you some examples. This scatter plot is from a study
that was looking at high grade and low grade brain tumors. The high grade tumors are in red,
the low grade tumors are in blue. And the graph shows the correlation
between expression levels of a particular gene that's on the x-axis, and levels of
the biomarker CD44 that's on the y-axis. You can see that you're getting a lot
more information from a plot like this. The high grade tumors in red have a higher
level of both the gene expression and the CD44 biomarker
than the low grade tumors. You can see the red is more in the upper
right-hand corner than the blue is. But what you can see here that you
wouldn't be able to glean from summary statistics, is that there's a lot
of variation in that red group. Some of the people in the red or
the tumors in the red group have very high levels of both, but we also have
tumors that have low levels of both. So there's high variation here. You'll also notice that the relationship
between the gene expression and the biomarker, it's not a straight
line relationship, it's a bit curved. So you can see that the shape here is
not exactly a total linear relationship. So I love scatter plots because
they give you so much information. Again, you're kind of airing your dirty
laundry but that allows the reader to get a really good feel for
what's going on in your data. One caution on scatter plots though. If you are going to superimpose
either straight lines or curved lines like they have here, just be
aware that these lines can fool the eye. In the plot I'm showing here, there is a clear straight-line
relationship between x and y. So it's perfectly appropriate
to superimpose a straight line, a regression line, on that plot. But be careful because sometimes
lines can fool the eye. So I'm going to show you that now. So here's a scatter plot that I made. I just made up some data,
an x variable and a y variable. And then, I superimposed a line on that. If you just glance at this quickly, it looks like there's a nice inverse
relationship between x and y, right? It's actually an illusion, though. X and y are completely unrelated. But I superimposed a line
slanting down 90 degrees. And it draws your eye
in such a way that it makes you see an inverse
relationship between x and y. It makes it appear that those two
have an inverse relationship. And just to show you that this
is really just a visual trick, I also superimposed a 90 degree
line in the positive direction. And notice that this is
the exact same scatter plot. But when I put the line in the other
direction, all of a sudden, your eye starts to think that there is
a positive correlation between x and y. But of course, both of these
are just your eye being fooled. Because if I take the lines
off of this graph, you can see that there is actually no
relationship whatsoever between x and y. So it's easy to. [COUGH] To fool your eye. Be careful when you're superimposing lines
because it can make relationships look stronger than they really are,
and this can be misleading. A few tips for graphs, again, graphs
are supposed to tell a quick visual story. So you want to keep it simple,
you want to make it easy on your reader. Instead of representing different
groups with arbitrary symbols such as filled in circles, or
unfilled circles, or squares, or triangles,
try to be a bit more clever than this. For example, if you have a treatment
group and a control group, label the graph with t's for
treatment and c's for control. This is much easier on the reader because
they don't have to keep referring back to the legend. Also, use different colors for
different groups. When I learned to make graphics,
we used to have to use dash lines and solid lines to distinguish groups. Because you had to assume that your paper
was going to be read in black and white. People would copy papers out of journals,
and the copies would always be black and
white. Well, now we're in an era
when you can use color. Most everyone is reading papers on an
electronic device so you can go ahead and use colors to distinguish
different groups. That's much easier on the reader. Keep in mind that if you're
figure turns out too complex, maybe you should consider putting
that data in a table instead. So, let me give you some examples. Here's an example, the line graphs on
the left side of the slide are quite nice. I like those line graphs. You can see that there are four groups and
the proportion of cooperation, that's your y variable, is going down
over time in all the groups except one. That group is red seems to be different
than the other three groups in terms of the trajectory. So that line graph tells a nice story. But then the authors
also added a bar graph to the figure on the right-hand side. And this is summarizing the same
data that are in the line graph. What they did is they averaged
sessions five through ten. So that they could show that the red group
was, on average in those five sessions, statistically higher than
the other three groups. The stars are supposed to be
indicating statistically significant differences here. But it's very confusing. Those stars, it's not clear what
comparisons they're referring to. Plus, seeing the data
points from the individual sessions is much more informative. Informative than just seeing an average
of an arbitrary number of sessions. So I don't think you gain anything by
adding the bar graph to this figure. It just serves to clutter up the graph and
confuse the reader. The authors could have just added
a star somewhere on the line graph to indicate that the red group
differed from the other three based on the statistical test that
compares the trajectories over time. One other tip here, notice that the line
graph uses squares, triangles, diamonds, and circles to differentiate
the different groups. It's a little hard on the reader because
the reader has to keep looking back to the legend to figure
out which group is which. Maybe the authors could
have labeled the groups, the group names on the graph somewhere or
used more informative plotting symbols. Here's another example where
the graph has too much going on. It's not telling a clear and simple story. The bar graphs are too cluttered,
there's too much data. There are no clear patterns, so it's not obvious what the take
home point is supposed to be. If the data are this complicated, you maybe better off presenting them
in a table rather than a figure. A figure is supposed to tell
a simple visual story and I don't think this one accomplishes that. This figure is from the same paper,
has the same problems. Finally, I'm going to jump now
into diagrams and drawings. You have diagrams and
drawings at your disposal. And these are under used,
I think in the scientific literature. They can be very powerful. For example, many things don't
lend themselves well to text. Such as explaining the flow
of participants in a study or the details of an experimental setup. Often a picture is better for
conveying this information. Also if you have some kind
of hypothetical cause and effect model that you're
trying to propose. A diagram is great for indicating how
you think those variables interact, especially if
the relationships are complex. This may all be better put
in a picture than trying to explain it in some complicated text. Also if you're talking about something
people can't see like virus or proteins or antibiotics, a cartoon can help your readers
visualize what you're talking about. So think about in your paper, if there's places where you could use
a diagram or drawing to your advantage. I'll give you some examples. So here's a figure from a paper that was
looking at drug company advertisements and journal. This drawing sums up the typical
layout of an advertisement. So you see that at the beginning,
at the top of the advertisement page, you get the picture of the happy
physician or happy patient. And then you get at
the bottom right-hand corner, you always have your
Kaplan-Meier survival curve. A picture is worth 1,000 words here, if you tried to describe this set up in
prose, it would be uninteresting to read. It would be boring to read and it would be
much harder to convey that information. This is visual information, so
might as well put it in a drawing. I love this diagram. This was in a paper describing dog
bites and cat bites in human patients. Rather than just sticking
the data into a boring table, the authors were clever enough
to put it in a picture. The key messages are instantly clear. Most bites happen on the hands, and there's some difference in the location
of cat bites versus dog bites. That's a much more interesting and nice way to present the data than
just putting it in a boring table. Diagrams are great for
drawing causal diagrams like this. You can see how this is much simpler
to present in a diagram than to try to explain all those relationships prose. And finally, here's a cartoon illustration
of the creation of some novel antibodies. Again, the picture is really helpful
to the reader in understanding how these antibodies are built. And the final thing I want to
mention is that nowadays, you're not just limited to tables and
figures. Your papers can have videos, this is back to the paper on plants
eating microbes for nutrients? Seeing is believing applies even more for
movies than for still pictures. So we can play this little video and actually see the microbes
being taken up by the plant.