So far, this course has focused
on writing research manuscripts. This week, I'm going to cover
other types of writing in science, such as the literature review, grants,
and letters of recommendation. Some of these types of writing may be
things that you need for your career right now, some of them may be things to
put in your repertoire for the future. In this module, I'm going to talk about
writing a narrative review article. A review article is a great thing for a graduate student or
young investigator to tackle. It's a lot of work, but it gives you a chance to dive into
the most recent literature in your field. It also gives you practice on
reading papers synthesizing and organizing a large amount of
information and of course, writing. Review articles can also help your career. Well-written and well-organized reviews
may garner a lot of readers and citations because they
are helpful to other scientists. What's the goal of a review article? The idea is to synthesize the recent,
primary literature on a topic. There's a huge proliferation
of papers these days. Nobody can keep up with
the entire primary literature. Your job, as a review article author,
is to pull together and summarize the recent primary literature so that somebody can go to your paper and
get a good sense of the field. A review article summarizes what we
know and what we dont know on a topic. It may also address
particular controversies, and in the process of doing a review article,
you're also putting together a comprehensive list of
citations on a topic or research question, and that can be
a great resource for others in the field. Just so you are aware, there are three
basic types of review articles. In this module, I am going to address the non-systematic
review, also called the narrative review. But I want you to be aware
of the other options. A systematic review is a more
comprehensive review that uses a rigorous search strategy to try
to identify all relevant studies on a particular research question,
even possibly unpublished studies. There are also what we call meta-analysis. These are systematic reviews
that go one step further, informally pool data across different
studies using statistics for data pooling. Again, in this module,
I'm just addressing non-systematic reviews as the other two types involves
some more technical details, more technical than I want to
get into in this module. When writing a narrative review article,
you start by searching the literature. You will likely start with a broader
search to get a sense of what's out there. But then you are going to
need to narrow your focus. Otherwise, there will just
be too many papers to read. Your review needs to have
a clear thesis or theme. This is the key to a good review article. It can't just be,
I'm going to review micro arrays, or I'm going to review breast cancer,
those topics are too broad. Instead, you might choose to review
the use of microarrays in microbiology, or statistical techniques for
microarray data. Or the history of microarray technology. You could do a whole review on
the link between breast cancer and exercise or
between breast cancer and alcohol. The topic has to be narrow and
focused enough to make it tractable. Early in my career, I wrote a literature
review on eating disorders in athletes. The body of literature on eating
disorders in this specific population was small enough that I was able to cover
this literature in a single review. Organization is critical. When we talked about the writing process,
I told you about the pre-writing step. For review articles, the importance
of pre-writing is magnified. You have to find a way to get organized or
you will never finish writing the review. There's just to much information. For my review on eating
disorders in athletes, I typed notes from each
paper as I read the papers. I also figured out the sections and subsections of the paper,
early in the process. So that I could organize my notes,
by section and by subsection. There are several computer programs
available that can help you to organize your references and notes,
such as endnote and Mendely. You can see that the reading, note
taking and organization of information is going to take way more time than
the actual writing of the review. So focus on that pre-writing step. I recommend writing the article in
sections, each with their own headings. That helps to organize the review and
also makes life easier for readers. If you have numeric information,
maybe put it in a summary table, for example, I used a table in my review
to present data about the prevalence of eating disorders in different sports,
and for men and women separately. If you have a tangential information,
you could put that in sidebars. I had case reports on individual athletes
who suffered from eating disorders. These made interesting stories, but
that kind of thing can go in a sidebar or box off to the side, if it's hard
to integrate it into the text. Finally, write for a broad audience. People may be reading your review
article as an introduction to the field. So don't abbreviate too much. And don't assume prior knowledge. And, of course,
write in a lively, engaging, and easy to read style, using all the writing
tips you've learned in this course. A review article usually
starts with an abstract, which I recommend that you write last. You're going to have an introduction
section that clearly states the aim of the review. In my article on eating
disorders in athletes, I started with some historical papers,
I went back to the 1980s, where the first papers on eating disorders
in ballet dancers were published. These papers romanticized eating
disorders in athletes, so I talked about this as an interesting
way to introduce the topic. But then I jumped into my overall theme, which was that eating disorders in
athletes need to be considered separately from eating disorders in
the general population. The nature of the disease may be
fundamentally different in athletes. And then,
I clearly stated the goal of my review, which was to critically evaluate the
literature in the areas of measurement, prevalence, risk factors, outcomes,
diagnosis, prevention, and treatment. The body of the paper should
be broken into sections that have a nice logical structure. For my review paper, it was easy because I
just divided my sections into definitions and diagnostic criteria, measurement,
prevalence, risk factors, etc. And then, I even had subsections within each of those sections
with separate subheadings. In each section, I summarized what we know
on the topic, what remains unknown, and how studies could do better in
the future to fill in the gaps. The conclusion should
summarize what you found and give specific recommendations for
what researchers should do going forward. In my review,
I noted that male athletes are at much higher risk of eating
disorders than men in general, but eating disorders in male athletes
has been sorely understudied. I also suggested a specific
type of study design. That might be able to more accurately
identify eating disorders in athletes. So I gave a bunch of very specific
recommendations including stating what I thought should be the priorities
in research going forward. Then, of course, you have the references,
for example, my review had 173 references. Just to give you an example of a theme,
or thesis, so the theme of my literature review was that eating disorders in
athletes have distinct ideologies and require specialized approaches
to things like measurement, diagnosis prevention and treatment. The aims of the literature review,
the chapter were to critically review the latest research on eating disorders on
athletes including, measurement issues, prevalence, risk factors, sequelae,
prevention and treatment strategies. And the sections of my paper lined
up exactly with these goals. I had an introduction, and
then definitions and diagnostic criteria, then measurement issues, then prevalence,
then risk factors, and so on. And I actually had
subsections with subheadings, within each of these larger sections. For example, under outcomes, I had
distinct subsections on skeletal effects, injuries, detriments to performance,
mortality and comorbidities. It was pretty easy to write
the review once I had my organizational structure in place. Because each of the subsections had, maybe one to ten relevant papers
that needed to be synthesized. So again,
the key to review articles is narrowly and clearly defining the theme of
your review and then collecting, reading and organizing your papers
in an efficient manner, and then coming up with a good,
logical organizational structure. If you can do all that,
then writing the review is much easier. Here are some other examples of reviews. Here, I'm quoting a review on
CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing. CRISPR-Cas9 is a huge topic,
but the authors didn't try to review everything about CRISPR-Cas9,
rather they narrowed in on the history of the technology,
so this review was focused on history. Here were the sections of that paper. If you skim through them,
you'll see that they give an introduction to the technology, and
then they go back decades in history. Then, they talk about figuring
out the biological mechanism of how CRISPR-Cas9 actually works. Then, they go into the more recent
developments in the technology, and they give some clues about
where we're going, and what the technology might be used for
in the future. Here's another example,
Ebola has been written about a lot lately due to the big outbreak in
West Africa that occurred in 2014. This review that I'm quoting
here looked specifically at one controversial aspect of Ebola, which
is how long does the virus persist and shed after someone has recovered
from Ebola and isn't sick anymore. That was a major concern especially at
the end of the outbreak because doctors were worried about new cases cropping
up and rekindling the epidemic. Here are the sections of that paper, they
briefly describe their search strategy that's not essential in a narrative
review, but something you could include. Then, they reviewed studies that
have measured shedding in blood and body fluids. Then, they reviewed all the studies
that have tried to define the risks of transmission
from various modes. Such as sexual transmission and
mother to child transmission. Then, they gave a conclusion
with take home messages, like one of the take home messages was
that although there are documented cases of sexual transmission from survivors,
the risk is pretty low. And another take home message was,
we just don't know about things like transmission through saliva or
tears of survivors. So more research would be
needed on those areas.