In this second module I'm going to
go through some specific examples. These are representative of what's out
there in the scientific literature. They're also examples of what not to do. I want to start my slides
with a disclaimer. I pick up snippets, sentences, paragraphs from various things
I read, sometimes my students' work, sometimes the scientific literature,
and I'm often critiquing that writing. So I tend to omit exact citations
from my slides, just so that it doesn't appear that I'm
critiquing any particular author. Really, these examples just typify what's
out there in the scientific literature. I want to start with a sentence that I was
reading in an article in the journal of Clinical oncology. This is one of the top cancer journals,
and this was the first sentence
of the introduction section. This is when the authors are supposed
to be drawing you into their paper. And it reads, adoptive cell transfer,
immunotherapy is based on the ex vivo selection of tumor-reactive lymphocytes,
and their activation and numerical expression before reinfusion
to the autologous tumor-bearing host. Now I have a background in biology, and
I still find this sentence hard to read. I have to struggle to get through it. And that's a shame because, if your reader
has to struggle to get through your sentences, they may not
finish reading your paper. They certainly aren't going to
understand your ideas. So ask yourself the question,
is this sentence easy to understand? I don't think it is. Is the sentence enjoyable and
interesting to read? No, it's not enjoyable, when you have
to struggle just to get through it. And really the scientific
literature should be enjoyable and interesting to read. Here's another fun example. This was from a paper I was reading
from the journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology. It was actually an interesting
article that had some practical implications about
the way that we apply sunscreen. And so I was trying to write about it for
a very general audience. I was reading along in the article and
then I get to this sentence. These findings imply that the rates
of ascorbate radical production and its recycling via dehydroascorbate
reductase to replenish the ascorbate pool are equivalent at the lower irradiance,
but not equivalent at higher irradiance
with the rate of an ascorbate radical production exceeding its
recycling back to ascorbate. All right, you can see that this sentence
is incredibly difficult to read. Even if you had a strong
background in chemistry it still very difficult to understand. So you again want to ask yourself,
is this sentence readable? I don't think it's very readable. Is it written to inform or to obscure? And I ask this question because, sometimes when I'm reading
the scientific literature I wonder, if the authors are being intentionally
obscure, intentionally obtuse. If they're intentionally trying to
obscure their material in the hopes that if nobody understands it, then
nobody can poke holes in their research. Certainly we don't want to be doing that, certainly the point of
scientific writing is to inform. I'm going to point out one feature
that's commen to both of these two passages that I just showed you. In both of those examples,
they took some nice spunky verbs and turned them into clunky nouns. This is incredibly common
in academic writing, but it makes the writing hard to read. Because verbs drives sentences
whereas nouns slow them down. In that first example, we have selection,
activation, expression, and reinfusion. Those are all nouns that
are dragging the sentence down, but they could've been verbs. Select, activate, express, and reinfuse. If the same problem in this second
sentence, we get production and recycling which are nouns
that could have been verbs. To produce, to recycle. Writing with verbs is actually
something we're going to spend a lot of time on next week in our unit on verbs. So I took that second sentence, and I tried to translate it into
something understandable. Here's what I came up with. These findings imply that at lower
radiation ascorbate radicals are produced and recycled at the same rate, but
at higher radiation they are produced faster than they can be
recycled back to ascorbate. It's not the most exciting sentence ever,
but I think it's at least understandable now. You can get the gist of what
the authors are trying to say. Notice what I did here, is I stripped
a lot of extra words from that sentence. I've got it down to about half
the size of the original. And then I turned those nouns,
production and recycling back into verbs, produced and recycled. I want to get across two
themes in this course. One is that even though we're writing
about science, about complex and technical things, that doesn't mean
we have to use complex language. We can get across complex and
technical ideas even with simple language. If we did that, scientific
writing would be a lot easier and more enjoyable to read. And you want to aim to write things
that are easy to understand, and are enjoyable for your reader. I love this quote, I pulled this out
of something I read back in 2003, and I kept it in my slides ever since, because
I think it makes a really important point. The author writes, my professor friend
told me that in his academic world, publish or perish is really true. He doesn't care if nobody reads it or
understands it as long as it's published. And there's a hint of truth here right? There is pressure to publish,
and sometimes it may feel like you're just trying to get something
published, and get it on your CV. That's a shame, because obviously that
shouldn't be the goal of science. If nobody cares about your work and
nobody reads it, then obviously, it's not going to move
science along at all. So when you're sitting down to write, I want you to think very
carefully about making sure that, your reader understands your writing, and
that your reader cares about your writing. You want to make you reader care. If you do that, they're more
likely to pick up on your ideas, they're more likely to cite your work, and
it's more likely to move science forward.