As I was going through the slides in
the last module on the active voice, I might have raised a question for
some of you. Whenever I talk about the active voice
I always get students who raise their hands and say, but I've been told
that I'm not supposed to use we or I. I'm not supposed to use personal
pronouns in my scientific manuscript. And, of course, to use the active voice,
you're going to need to use we or I. So you might be wondering, is it okay for me to use personal pronouns
in my scientific manuscript? I'm here to tell you, yes,
it is okay to use we and I. If somewhere along the way somebody told
you that personal pronouns are not okay, I am going to try to
convince you otherwise. There are several reasons
why I think we and I are perfectly fine to use in scientific
writing and other formal writing. The biggest reason is simply that
in order to use the active voice, you usually have to write with we or I. And the active voice is just livelier. It's easier to read, and I want scientists to write in the most
clear and engaging way possible. To do so, you're probably
going to have to use we and I. I also disagree with people who say that
removing personal pronouns from your writing somehow makes it more objective. I think that's a myth. Taking yourself out of the paper doesn't
in any way make your science more objective. And I'll talk about this a little
bit more on the next slide. Finally, another really important reason
for you to use personal pronouns, is that when you put your name
as an author on the paper, you are taking public responsibility for
its content. So you should actively
claim responsibility for the assertions in the text by using we or
I. I've heard people argue that removing
personal pronouns somehow lends objectivity to your paper. I think that's just wrong. You and your team designed, conducted and
interpreted the experiments. To write in a way that implies that
the experiments just kind of happened is misleading. The experiments and analysis did
not materialize out of thin air. So maybe removing personal pronouns gives
an illusion of being more objective, but it certainly does not make
the science more objective. And, interestingly, people have
been discussing the active versus passive voice for a long time in science. I found this paper In Science Magazine
from 1957, and I found this nice quote. She sums up my point very well, I think. She writes, after all,
human agents are responsible for designing experiments, and
they are present in the laboratory. Writing awkward phrases to avoid
admitting their responsibility and their presence is an odd
way of being objective. All right, even if you're not convinced
by any of the other reasons I've just given you, here is a very practical
reason why you should use we and I. Journal editors want you to. Journal editors recognize that
the active voice is much easier to read. And they want people to
read their journals. So the style guidelines for many journals explicitly tell you
to write in the active voice. For example, the style guidelines
from Science Magazine. They say right there, use active voice
when suitable, particularly when necessary for correct syntax, e.g., to address
this possibility, we constructed. They are instructing you to use we or I. Other top journals give
similar instructions. And actually, it's worthwhile if
we click on this link here, and look at the style guidelines
from Science Magazine. I'll just share a few of these with you. You'll notice that the editors tell you
to do a lot of the things that we've been talking about in this course. They tell you to avoid jargon,
as we talked about last week. They tell you to use the active voice. They tell you to write concisely, use even though rather than
in spite of the fact that. All the same kinds of things
we have been talking about. So editors of journals really
do want you to write this way. Finally, I can point you to some
great papers that use we and I. Here's a great example, Watson and
Crick's celebrated 1953 paper in Nature, where they give the structure of DNA. The very first sentence of that paper
begins, we wish to suggest a structure for the salt of deoxyribose nucleic acid. The first word in that paper is we. And they use we throughout the paper. We wish to suggest, we believe,
we wish to put forward. This is a great paper to
read if you have a chance. I've actually given the link here. This is a famous paper obviously because
the scientific discovery is so important. But not only that,
it's a very well written paper. It's in the active voice,
it's lively, it's concise. It's easy to understand
their take home messages. They made the implications
immediately obvious. So the paper itself is really quite
remarkable in terms of the writing. If you have time, take a look at it and
pay attention to their writing style.