in this next module, we're going to
practice using the colon and the dash to merge sentences. I'm going to lead you through my edits, so it's fine to just watch this
video all the way through. But if you have extra time, it's always
a good idea to pause the video and try editing the examples on your own. I have provided the text of
the examples if you want to do that. Here's the first example. It says evidence-based medicine
teaches clinicians the practical application of clinical epidemiology, as needed to address specific
problems of specific patients. It guides clinicians on how to find
the best evidence relevant to a specific problem, how to assess the quality of that
evidence, and perhaps most difficult, how to decide if the evidence
applies to a specific patient. Okay, hopefully as I'm reading that
out loud, you noticed the repetition. There's a lot of repetition here,
there's a lot of wordiness. As a specific example, that first sentence says, evidence-based
medicine teaches clinicians. The second sentence says,
it guides clinicians. And this is one of those instances, where I imagine that
the author was sitting there. They're saying to themselves,
I already used the word teaches, and I don't want to repeat myself, so
I'm going to reach for the thesaurus. And they find the word guides,
and they're happy. But remember to catch yourself
when you're doing this. If you're reaching for
the thesaurus, ask yourself, do I really need the second
instance of the word at all? This is a case where we
don't need to repeat. We can actually merge these
two sentences together, so that the teaches clinicians
reaches across both sentences. Another thing to point out about
this example is that we have a list of things in the second sentence, how to
find, how to assess, and how to decide. And as I've mentioned,
a colon is a good way to set up a list. So perhaps we can use the colon
here to set up that list and draw this all into a single sentence. So we can say evidenced-based medicine
teaches clinicians the practical applications of clinical epidemiology. And then I'm going to put the colon
here because I think this as needed to address specific problems
of specific patients is very vague and wordy and is just completely not needed,
so we can put the colon here. We no longer need the it guides clinicians
because we already said teaches clinicians. We can just dive right in to the list. Evidence-based medicine teaches clinicians
how to find, how to assess, and how to decide. Now there's some other words
we can trim out here, so I trimmed out a few more words,
but here's my final edit. Evidence-based medicine teaches
clinicians the practical application of clinical epidemiology: how to find,
how to assess, and how to decide. So I joined those two sentences
together with a colon. We could probably do even
a little bit better here. There's even a bit more we can edit. When I edited this for the author
originally, they really wanted to make that point about applying clinical
epidemiology, so I left that in. But that application of clinical
epidemiology, that was somewhat wordy, so I think we could even cut that out and
just say, evidence-based medicine teaches clinicians how to find,
how to assess, and how to decide. And notice, now you don't even
need the colon to set up the list. Okay, one more example, now, we're going to use the dash
to bring sentences together. So this one reads, finally, the lessons
of clinical epidemiology are not meant to be limited to academic
physician-epidemiologists, who sometimes have more interest in
analyzing data than caring for patients. Clinical epidemiology holds the promise
of providing clinicians with the tools necessary to improve
the outcomes of their patients. As I'm reading that, hopefully you
noticed some of this wordiness. I hope you also noticed that we've
got this kind of long clause, descriptive clause, thrown in there, who sometimes have more interest in
analyzing data than caring for patients. And this is an instance where we
could probably set off that long, descriptive clause with dashes. And we could just connect the first and
the second sentence. So that's what I'm going to do here. There wasn't a great transition between
the first sentence and second sentence, so using dashes here will
also solve that problem. So what I'm going to do
is I am going to just put all of that descriptive
clause between two dashes. So we get, finally,
the lessons of clinical epidemiology, and then we get some wordiness here,
are not meant to be limited to. What if we just said
the lessons are not limited to, get rid of the meant to be,
to academic physician-epidemiologists, who sometimes have more interest in
analyzing data than caring for patients. And then, we don't need to repeat clinical
epidemiology, so we can get rid of that. The lessons hold the promise of providing,
but hold the promise of providing is
a really long way to just say provides. So we could substitute
just one verb there. And then we get clinicians with
the tools necessary, well, the word necessary is not necessary there. Provide clinicians with the tools to
improve the outcomes of their patients. There's actually a shorter
way to say that. Instead of saying the outcomes
of their patients, we could say, their patients' outcomes, and
it's just slightly shorter. So we can edit that one down to, finally, clinical epidemiology is not limited
to academic physician-epidemiologists, who are sometimes more interested in
analyzing data than caring for patients, but provides clinicians with the tools
to improve their patients' outcomes. So that's a lot smoother, and it gets the
information across much more efficiently. One final thought on this edit. I noticed that in the first sentence, when
I edited this, I actually left in a not. And I've told you to
try to get rid of nots. I ended up deciding that
the not works okay here, and I didn't find an alternative
that I liked better. Probably if I worked harder on this, I could find a way to turn that
into a positive construction. Maybe you could say something like,
finally clinical epidemiology extends beyond academic physician-epidemiologists,
something like that. But I think it reads okay with the not. So I just want to point out that I've
given you a lot of guidelines and rules in this course, and you should keep
in mind that these are not absolutes. Sometimes you'll decide that
a sentence works better with a not or with a passive verb. As long as you've thought about it
carefully and deliberately, that's fine.