In this next module,
we're going to discuss authorship. My main advice on authorship is
to think about the authorship before you write the paper. Especially, if you're
the person drafting the paper. Think about who is going
to get authorship. Think about what the order will be. Run that by people and
establish that early on in the process so that everybody's on the same page. So that nobody feels slighted later on. There are two questions that you
have to answer with authorship. First of all, who gets authorship? Who are you going to include
as an author on your paper? The main criterion here is that if you
are an author listed on the paper, then you are taking public
responsiblity for its content. That's a high bar. It means that if later,
the paper is found to have a problem. If it’s found to have fraud,
if it’s retracted. You are responsible. You are liable for those transgressions. And that is going to reflect badly on you. So if you are not the primary
author of the paper, before you except
co-authorship ask yourself the question as to whether you want
to take that level of responsibility. Do you really understand the ins and
outs of the paper well enough? And if you're the one
writing the paper and trying to decide on authors,
keep in mind that most people don't want to be included on your paper
unless they have been fully involved. For example, sometimes I give students, or
colleagues, a little help on statistics, or editing, or something. And then they might come back to me and
say, do you want to be an author on the paper? And I don't want to be an author on that
paper, because I haven't been sufficiently involved with its content to feel that
I can take public responsibility. I think junior people feel this obligation to include every senior person that
they've ever talked to about the article. But keep in mind that most people don't
want to be on your paper unless they can take public responsibility for
its content. So they're not going to be offended
if you don't offer them authorship. You can always put them in the
acknowledgment section as I'll talk about it a minute. And then of course there's
the issue of order, what order with the authors appear in? In general, of course, order implies
the authors' relative contributions. The first author is usually the person
who wrote up the draft of the paper, might have been the person who collected
all the data, often a graduate student, or a junior person. And the last position is usually
the senior author, the head of the lab or research team, or the senior
person who oversaw the research. That's a position of stature as well. Sometimes you'll have dual first authors, if maybe two graduate students
worked on it together equally. In between the first and last positions, you should put everyone else in
their order of their contributions. If it's not clear if the rest of the
authors contributed equally without much differentiation, you could consider
putting them in alphabetical order or even reverse alphabetical order. And sometimes you get these large
working groups now with lots and lots of people,
international collaborations. Those large working groups
can be cited as a group because they often comprise
hundreds of authors. As I mentioned,
papers have an acknowledgements section. That's where you are going to
cite any funding sources. So if you're a graduate student
who is on a certain fellowship, make sure you cite your
funding source there. If it was a grant funded study,
you're going to mention the grant there. This is also a good place to
acknowledge people who you don't feel merit authorship, and who probably don't
want to be authors on the paper, but maybe they gave you some materials, or they offered some statistical
consulting or some other advice. It's a way to acknowledge those people
without making them take on the role of author. I also want to mention the ethical issues
of ghost authorship and guest authorship. This is a hot button particularly
in the medical literature. It's been written about
in the New York Times and its had some pretty profound
influence on the medical literature. It's important that you
are aware of these practices. Obviously they are to be avoided
when it comes to authorship. A ghost author is a professional writer who usually a company hires
to draft a manuscript. At the end of the day the writer is not
listed as an author on the manuscript though they may have
written the whole paper. Hence the term, ghost authorship. Now, there's nothing wrong with
professional writers being involved in the writing process. Scientists can certainly use
the help of writers, but it's the lack of transparency
that's suspect here. The ghost writer is likely a paid gun for
the drug company, but this is completely hidden. The related type of authorship
is guest authorship, or sometimes called honorary authorship. This is when a company does a study,
analyzes the data, draws their conclusions,
drafts the paper, then they call or email an academic researcher at
a prestigious university and invite them to be an author,
often the first author on the paper. That academic researcher certainly can't
take public responsibility for the study. But they're often willing to lend their
name because drug company studies are often large high quality clinical
trials that get published in great journals, and
this goes on the academics resume. The drug company meanwhile gets to
bolster their papers credibility by leading researchers to believe that
an outside independent unbiased expert was a driving force in the study. Obviously, this is misleading if in fact
the academic was only minimally involved and is simply lending their name, and
their institution's name to the paper. It's unclear how common these
types of unethical authorship practices are in the literature. And journals have now cracked down on this
so hopefully the prevalence is decreasing. But a study in
the British Medical Journal in 2011 that surveyed top medical journals
found evidence of honorary or guest authorship in 17.6% of papers. And evidence of ghost
authorship in 7.6% of papers. So at least in 2011,
this practice was fairly pervasive. If you're interested in learning more
about this, the medical community learned a lot about this practice because of
litigation surrounding the drug Vioxx. Merck was being sued over the drug Vioxx, which was to found to increase
the risk of heart attacks. Because of the court trials, internal company documents
entered the public domain. And there's a fascinating
article in JAMA from 2008, where some researchers systematically
reviewed 250 court documents related to published clinical trial and
published review papers. What they found was pretty shocking. The researchers reviewed emails and other documents related to 24 clinical
trial papers that Merck was involved with. Here's what they dug up,
straight from the results section. Documents were found describing Merck
employees working either independently or in collaboration with medical publishing
companies to prepare manuscripts and subsequently recruiting external academically affiliated
investigators to be authors. Recruited authors were frequently
placed in the first and second positions of the authorship list. The use of guest or honorary authorship was an accepted
practice at Merck apparently. They also looked at 72 review papers that
the company was involved in publishing. They found, documents were found
describing Merck marketing employees developing plans for manuscripts, contracting with medical publishing
companies to ghostwrite manuscripts, and recruiting external, academically
affiliated investigators to be authors. Recruited authors were commonly
the sole author on the manuscript and offered honoraria for their participation. Only half of the review articles
even disclosed that Merck had sponsored those papers. That's quite insidious and you can see that this could have profound
impact on the medical literature. Merck could actually put this whole set
of opinions and perspectives out in the medical literature with it having
the stamp of coming from an academic institution, when it really came from
the drug company marketing people. You can see why this has
been such a hot issue. And just to give you an idea,
this is an actual internal company email that was made public
during the court trial. It shows you how blatant this practice is. The company writes to the potential guest
author, I would like to invite you to be an author on the abstract and
manuscript for this study. We are currently preparing both for
submission before the end of this year. Could you please let me know if you
would be interested in authorship on both the abstract and manuscript, one
of the two planned publications, or none? In making your decision, you may want to
take into consideration that the results of this study were
negative at first glance. Basically, the company is giving
out authorship like a gift. And they're allowing the researcher to
choose whether or not they want to accept this gift based on how the study
results happened to come out. Clearly the author being
invited here has no basis for taking public responsibility for
the content of these articles. Obviously this researcher was not
heavily involved in the analysis, because the analysis is already done, or the writing of the paper,
it's already being drafted. This is a clear case of guest authorship. And the trial turned up many
emails like this that made it obvious as to what was going on. Again, it's a fascinating topic,
it's been widely written about. I'm giving you some references here,
if you'd like to read more, about these unethical
authorship practices. There's some interesting articles
in the New York Times that are worth your time to read.