Hi, my name is Crystal Botham, and I'm the Director
of the Stanford Biosciences Grant
Writing Academy. I'm going to discuss 10 tips for getting started
writing grants. Why submit a research proposal? There's a number of reasons why. One, is that writing rigorously clarifies and
deepens your thinking. Also, articulating
research priorities will increase your
productivity and impact. Of course, developing
and communicating your ideas is critical
in all career paths. Plus, securing funding is an accomplishment and has
positive career benefits. During the next
couple of slides, I'm going to give
you tips for how to get started
writing your grant now that you know that
it's important that you do it at all career stages. First, start early and
gather critical information. You want to compile
a comprehensive list of all the funding opportunities
that you can apply for. Ask what your colleagues
and peers are applying to. Ask your mentors
for ideas as well. Some institutions also
compile lists of grants, including fellowships and
career development awards, so find out if yours does. Once you have a
comprehensive list of funding opportunities
you can apply for, gather critical information about those funding
opportunities. This includes the instructions, as well as funded and
unfunded examples. Let's just look at an example of the NIH NRSA fellowship as an example of what type of information you might
want to gather. First, you want to read
the funding announcement in its entirety. Here's just a screenshot of the funding announcement
for the NIH NRSA, and this is just the first page of the funding announcement. It's several pages long
and you want to read the entire document and
understand what it's telling you. Sometimes you have to follow website attachments and/or
find other documents. In short, you want to have all the information
available to you. Then identify what are
the review criteria for the funding agency that
you're applying to and the application
you're applying to. For the NIH NRSA, there are five main
review criteria. Those include you,
the applicant. The reviewers are looking at your record of
research productivity, the candidate's potential for independent research
in the future. The mentor, co- mentor
and collaborators. The reviewers are asking, is there a strong track
record of mentorship? They're evaluating if there's
an adequate mentoring plan. The research training plan. Is the research significant, appropriate, and feasible? These are the types of question your reviewers are
looking at when they're considering the
research training plan. Then the training potential. Is their training
plan appropriate? Will the plan contribute to
the applicant's success? Then the environment
institutional commitment. What is their commitment to the candidate's development
into a scientist, and is there adequate
resources available? You want to identify
the review criteria so that when you're
writing your application, you can make sure that you're
making the points that the reviewers are looking for in terms of the review criteria. You also want to understand
the review process. NIH has a really nice video about the NIH peer
review process, and it's called the NIH
Peer Review Revealed, you can find it on YouTube. It provides a front row seat to the NIH peer review meeting. A lot of other funding agencies base their peer review
process on the NIH's, so it's a nice video to understand what a peer review
process will look like. You also want to learn about
the internal policies and processes that your specific
institution may have. Sometimes applications
need to be submitted internally before the
sponsors' deadline. There's extra
paperwork involved, so make sure you find out about these policies and
processes early. Number 2, create a game
plan and write regularly. Writing a compelling
grant takes time, a lot of time, which is challenging
to balance with a hectic laboratory schedule
and other responsibilities. To reduce stress, divide
the grant requirement into smaller task by creating a detailed timeline with
goals or milestones. Having a game plan with daily or weekly goals will also help you avoid procrastination. Make sure you're writing
regularly, daily, or every other day to establish an effective
writing practice. This will increase your
productivity and reduce your anxiety because writing
will become a habit. It's also important to make your writing time
non-negotiable, so other obligations or distractions don't
impede your progress. Tip number 3 is to find
your research niche. You need to have a deep
awareness of your field. You really want this
ability to understand your field and to
be able to identify critical knowledge
gaps or needs. These ideas are bottlenecks
in the field that if you were able to fill
in or address the need, then you could significantly
move your field forward. Compelling projects
also often combine two unseemingly unrelated
threats of work to challenge or shift the current field or
clinical practice paradigm. It's important to have
a broad familiarity with the wider scientific
community as well. You want to contemplate how the concepts and approaches in the wider scientific
community could be extended to address the critical knowledge
gap in your field. Keep a list of questions or problems inherent
to your field and update this list after
reading peer-reviewed papers, review articles, and attending
seminars and conferences. Narrow down and focus your list through discussions
with your colleagues, mentors, and key
researchers in your field. Of course, since
you're applying to a grant a fellowship or a
career development award, make sure that your research
that is being proposed is relevant and appropriate
for the mission of the funding
opportunity announcement. Tip number 4 is to use your Specific Aims
document as your road map. The Specific Aims document is a one-page description of your research plan during
the project period. We have another
video that you can learn more about how to write a compelling Specific Aims
page in another video. But briefly, your
Specific Aims page must concisely answer
the following questions. Is the research
question important? Compelling projects often
tackle a particular gap in the knowledge base
that when addressed significantly
advanced the field. What is the overall goal? The overall goal must
define the purpose of the proposal and
must be obtainable regardless of how the
hypothesis tests. What specifically will be done? Attract the reviewer's interest using attention,
getting headlines, describe your working
hypothesis and your approach to objectively
test the hypothesis. What are the expected
outcomes and impact? Describe what the
reviewers can expect after their proposal is completed in terms of advancement
to the field. Just like gears that
I'm showing here, the Specific Aims page and the answers to these questions
must be specifically aligned. Otherwise, it's not a very
effective Specific Aims page. Again, you can learn more
techniques for developing a one-page executive
summary of your research in the next video about
Specific Aims. Tip number 5 is build
a first-rate team. Team science is a
collaborative effort to address a scientific
challenge that leverages the strengths
and expertise of personnel trained
in different fields. The team approach is ideal for many scientific endeavors and coordinated teams
and investigators with diverse skills and knowledge especially helpful for studies of complex problems. Science can accelerate scientific innovation
and translation. Building a first-rate
team is especially important for fellowships and
career development awards. This team would
include your mentor, your co-mentor,
and the members of your advisory team as well. Tip Number 6 is develop a
complete research plan. See the video on communicating your research strategy
for more information. In short the research plan is a narrative that describes a set of goals and how you
will reach them. The first question that
needs to be answered is, is there a need? This is getting at
the significance and background information
of your project. Second, how will this specific
aims be accomplished? This includes the methods and
analyses that will be used. What are the expected outcomes, what might go wrong and
how will it be managed? What are the
alternative approaches? How long will the project take? Is it really feasible in the project time
for this proposal? Then what's next? What are the future directions
for this project? How is it going to
advance your field? Tip Number 7 is stop
and get feedback. Feedback is critical to developing a
first-class proposal. You need a wide audience
providing feedback because your reviewers will likely come from diverse
backgrounds as well. Be proactive in asking for feedback from your
colleagues and mentors. Even non-scientists can provide critical advice about the
clarity of your writing. When eliciting feedback, inform your reviewers of
your specific needs. For example, do you desire broader feedback on overall
concepts or feasibility? Or do you want advice on
grammar and spelling? Tip Number 8 tell a consistent
and cohesive story. Applications are also often composed of numerous
documents or sections. Therefore, it's important
that all your documents tell a consistent
and cohesive story. Let's look at the NIH, NRSA as an example again. Here is a list of the main
documents of this application. You might state your
long-term goal in the specific aims document
and the personal statement of your bio sketch and
then elaborate more on the long-term goal in the
career development documents. Each of these documents must
tell a consistent story. It's important to allow at
least one to two weeks have time after composing the
entire application to review and scrutinize
the story you tell to ensure it's
consistent and cohesive. Tip Number 9 is to follow specific requirements
and proofread for error and readability. Grants have specific formats and page requirements that
must be strictly followed. Keep these instructions
and the review criteria close at hand when
writing and revising. Applications that do not conform to the
required formatting or other requirements may be administratively rejected
before the review process. Meticulously follow all the
requirements and guidelines. Proofread your almost
final documents for errors and readability. Errors can be confusing
to reviewers. Also, if the documents have many misspelling or grammar
errors you reviewers will question the ability
of you to complete the proposed experiments
with precision and accuracy. Tip Number 10 recycle
and resubmit. Funding opportunity
announcements for various applications frequently
have similar requirements so it's fairly easy to
recycle your application or resubmit it to several different
funding opportunities. This can significantly increase
your odds for success, especially if you're
able to improve your application
with each submission by tackling reviewers comments
from a prior submission. However, some sponsors limit
concurrent applications to different funding
opportunities so read the
instructions carefully. You almost always
want to resubmit. Submitting a proposal is
like rolling the dice. Some you lose and some you win. But at 30 percent odds it's
not so bad to keep trying. Here are the 10 tips
for writing proposals. These tips that we
discussed today are broadly based on the 10 tips
from this paper, 10 simple rules for writing
a postdoctoral fellowship. But tip Number 5&6 were slightly changed in
this talk today.