In this next module, I'm going to
go through another example, and use it to illustrate some of
the principles of effective writing that I'm going to be talking
about this week as well as next week. Here's an example that I pulled out of
Cell, which is a top biology journal, with a high impact factor,
something around 30. Again, this example is typical
of the scientific literature. It reads, dysregulation of physiologic
microRNA, miR, activity has been shown to play an important role in tumor initiation
and progression, including gliomagenesis. Therefore, molecular species that can
regulate miR activity on their target RNAs without affecting
the expression of relevant mature miRs may play equally
relevant roles in cancer. I find this passage hard to read. I have to struggle to figure out
exactly what it is the authors were intending to say. I'm going to point out
some specific features that make this example difficult to read. First of all,
as in some earlier examples we saw, there's the use of nouns
rather than verbs. The authors use dysregulation,
initiation, progression, and expression. Those are all nouns that
could've been verbs. Dysregulate, initiate,
progress, and express. Verbs move sentences along,
whereas nouns slow the reader down. The others also use some vague words. The problem with vague words
is that the reader cannot get a concrete picture in their head
of what the author is talking about. So these vague words don't add anything. For example, the word physiologic here,
physiology is something that's really broad, so I'm not exactly sure
what the authors mean by physiologic. It doesn't add anything for me, and
then we get to molecular species. Molecular species could
be a lot of things, it doesn't give me a concrete picture
of what the authors are talking about. Also note the use of unnecessary
jargon and acronyms in this passage. We get the term gliomagenesis, which is a
fancy way to say the formation of glioma. So there's an easier and
more direct way to say that. We also get an interesting acronym or
initialism in this example. The acronym is actually the reason
that I picked this particular example, I find it amusing. The authors abbreviated
the term microRNA as miR. It's amusing because RNA is
already itself an acronym, so the authors have made
an acronym of an acronym. This just illustrates how ridiculous and
widespread acronyms and initialisms are in
the scientific literature. Authors love acronyms. They throw them in all over the place. The problem with acronyms is that,
unless they are standard terms that everybody is familiar with, most readers
aren't going to know your acronym. This means that every time they
get to your acronym in the paper, they're going to have to stop and
go and look that acronym up. It's like they have to
translate a foreign word. This is really annoying to readers and
it also greatly slows their reading down. So we don't want to do that obviously. You can see in this case,
there's no benefit to using the acronym. You're only saving a few letters here
by using miR rather than microRNA, but it completely slows the reader. So I'm going to encourage you, or
advise you to avoid the use of acronyms, other than those that are completely
standard that most people will know. Another thing I want to point out is, in this first sentence the authors
use the passive voice. We get the passive verb here is,
has been shown. Now, if you're not familiar with
the difference between active and the passive voice, don't worry. We're going to go into this in great
detail next week in our unit on verbs. But for now, I'll just point out that
this verb construction is awkward. The passive voice is hard to read
because it's not the way we talk. To give a simple example,
take the sentence, she throws the ball. That's in the active voice. To turn that into the passive voice,
you would say the ball is thrown by her. And you can hear how awkward that sounds. Again, we'll go into much more
detail about this next week. Now the second sentence is
actually in the active voice but it has a different problem with the verb. The subject of that sentence
is molecular species. The main verb or the predicate
of that sentence is may play. So notice we don't get to
the main verb for a long time. We have molecular species and
then this long descriptive clause, and then we finally get to
the main verb at may play. The problem is that the reader
is waiting for the verb. Until you give the reader the verb, the reader doesn't know where
you're going with the sentence. So putting too much distance between
the subject of the sentence and the main verb is a problem. That's another thing that we'll talk
about in great detail next week in our unit on verbs. So I took that passage and I rewrote
it to try to fix some of these issues. I did not have the authors sitting right
next to me while I was doing this edit, so I am not 100% sure that this is
what they were trying to say, but I think I got the gist of it. The rewrite says, changes in microRNA
expression play a role in cancer, including glioma. Therefore, events that disrupt
microRNAs from binding to their target RNAs may also promote cancer. Notice how much shorter and easier to understand this is
compared with the original passage. But it still conveys the same ideas. So this leads me to an overview of the
specific principles of effective writing that we're going to be talking
about this week and next week. The first principle I want you
to learn is to cut your words, cut unnecessary words and
phrases, get rid of the clutter. We are going to spend the rest of this
week talking about cutting clutter. Next week we'll talk in great detail about
the use of the active voice rather than the passive voice. And we'll also talk about writing
with verbs, using strong verbs, avoiding turning verbs into nouns,
and not burying the main verb. But for the rest of this week,
we're going to tackle cutting clutter.