Hi, my name is Sky Brubaker, and
I'm a post-doc at Stanford University. In this short video,
I will be discussing effective ways to communicate a research plan for
a grant or fellowship application. The research plan is a narrative document that should provide a clearly defined set
of goals and how you plan to reach them. When developing your research plan it can
be helpful to use a specific aims page as a road map. In a previous video Krystal Botham
introduced you to a set of questions that all specific aims
pages should address. First of all are you proposing
an important question in your project? What is the overall goal of the project? What specifically will
be done in the project? And what are the expected
payoffs of the project? The bulk of a research plan consists of
the overall goal and what will be done. And this is in the form of
detailed specific gains. However, you must not forget
that you need to communicate why the project is important,
and what can be expected. Thus, the detailed research plan will
bridge this gap between the need and the payoff. To instill this analogy of bridging a gap,
let's consider how we might create a research plan for a proposal to build
a bridge from San Francisco to Marin. To convince a funding agency for the money to do this you may have
to address some key questions. First, is there a need for
the bridge or for the project? And if there is a need,
why hasn't it been done already? Are there any specific barriers
that need to be overcome? Second, you'll need to address
the details of the project. How will the project be accomplished? This can be broken down into
some other key questions. Specifically, what other methods and
the analysis that will be used? What are the expected outcomes? What might go wrong? And how will it be managed? And what are some alternative
approaches if things do go wrong? Third, you'll need to address
how long a project will take. And finally, you'll want to
address the expected payoff and what are future directions that might
be envisioned following its completion. Answering these questions will
effectively address this background and significance, the aims,
the timeline and the conclusion and future directions section that can form
an outline for your research plan. So now that we have an outline for our research plan,
let's look at each section independently. First, let's take a look at
the background and significance section. In this section, you'll need to
address the importance of the problem. This may include the premise for
the proposed project, the strengths and weaknesses of previously published
research, or any of your preliminary data. This will allow you to outline a knowledge
gap, or a technical deficiency, that the project will overcome. In our bridge analogy, we might state
that we will provide a new avenue for exploration and commerce between
San Francisco and Marin and we may advance the field of
bridge building in the future. Briefly, I'd like to address
innovation in your research project. Because many applications request
a statement on innovation. Innovation can apply to improved
approaches or methodologies. Specifically you want to describe how your
proposal improves upon previous research. This can include but is not limited
to changes in methods, technology or improved experimental design. In our bridge analogy, we can state that
we'll be developing a new material for bridge building that will revolutionize
the way that we build bridges in the future. So now we have covered the Background and
Significance section of our research plan. Next step is the Aims section. As described by the instructions
directly from an NIH application form, your aims should include the following. A hypothesis. Specific aims and objectives
used to examine this hypothesis. A description of methods, approaches and
techniques that will be used. Discussion of possible problems and
how they will be managed. And finally alternative approaches
that might be used if needed. So how can we organize this
information into a cohesive document? Well we can break up the Aim
section into five parts. An introductory paragraph,
preliminary data, methods, expected outcomes, and
alternative approaches. Your introduction should be short,
about one paragraph. And provide the reviewers
with a conceptual overview of the importance of this aim. This will include a specific objective,
a working hypothesis, rationale behind the hypothesis,
and expected outcomes. The next section should
cover your preliminary data. This section may vary in length
depending on space limitations and the amount of preliminary
data you have to present. It should provide a critical
review of the relevant literature. Your preliminary studies that help
establish the project's feasibility. The data presented here
should be clear and capable of standing alone, outside
the greater framework of the grant. For example,
figure legends should be clear and more detailed giving some background and
data interpretation. By walking your reader
through the presented data, you lead the reviewer to conclude that you
and the project are capable of success. In our bridge analogy, we might state
that our new material has been tested for strength demonstrating that it will
be suitable for our proposed bridge. Next, you will develop your Methods
section that will provide a detailed description of the experimental design or
the aims. This should include validation of
essential reagents and approaches. Appropriate description of controls and their significance, any statistical
analysis that will be used, and the interpretations that can be
made from the resulting data. In this section remember to use
strong words like expect and can, avoiding weaker words like hope and
try. In our bridge analogy,
we might say that our proposed material will be regularly tested
throughout construction. And we expect that it's strength
capacity will be validated. You also need to describe the outcomes
that you expect from these experiments. Do this by summarizing the expected
experimental outcomes, and providing an interpretation of the data, specifically what is the immediate payoff
that you may get from these results? And does this address the knowledge
gap that you wish to bridge? In our bridge analogy on data collected
during construction, we might say that our results confirmed that
the material meets current standards and justifies continued work. This leads us into our alternative
approaches which is the final component of the Aims section. You can introduce alternative approaches
by highlighting potential problems. For example, if you don't get the expected
outcomes that you were hoping for. In our bridge analogy we might say that
if the strength of the new material is in question, it would only be used for certain portions of the bridge
that were less critical. So that sums up what's
required in the Aims section. Next we'll take a look at the timeline and
the conclusions and future directions required
in your research plan. A timeline is an important feature of
your proposal because it helps to bridge the gap between the need and the expected
payoff by demonstrating feasibility. In our bridge analogy,
you might state that in year 1, you expect the support structure to be complete and
in year 2, you expect the surface structure to be complete, and provide
data that supports this current timeline. You can also demonstrate
the feasibility of a project or the timeline that you
hope to achieve visually. This can help a reader more quickly gather the expected timeline between multiple
projects that may be overlapping. And it saves you space. Finally, let's look at the Conclusion and Future Directions at the end
of your research plan. In this section, you should
summarize the expected outcomes and how they will bridge
a current knowledge gap, and how the proposed project will
lead to progress in the field. Furthermore, you can discuss
future experiments or approaches, that may be possible after
the project has been accomplished. In our bridge analogy a critical
barrier has been eliminated and we've bridged the gap between
San Francisco and Marin. We can now explore Marin. Also, with the advent of
our new bridge technology we may one day be able to build
a bridge all the way to Hawaii. In this way, we've discussed
the immediate payoffs of the bridge, as well as future payoffs that are yet
to be unforeseen. In this way we discuss the immediate
payoffs as well as long term payoffs that may be achieved as
a result of this project. Now we've gone through the key sections
of your research plan outline. But remember, these sections are based
on a set of key questions for your research plan. For example, it should be clear
from reading your proposal that there is a need for the project. In addition, there should be
an understanding of the payoff and future possibilities that
will emerge from the project. It's your job to bridge this gap, between
the need and the payoff, by addressing how the project will be accomplished and
how long the project will take. Thus a good research plan always
bridges the gap between the need and the expected payoff. For further resources on
building your research plan, please look to the following. Thank you and have a great day.