In this next module, we're going to
practice applying the concepts that you've learned in both units one and
two. I'm going to flash some
sentences up on the screen and then I'm going to walk you
through how I would edit them. It's fine to just watch the video
from start to finish, but if you want some extra practice,
you might try pausing the video and attempting the edits on your
own before watching my edits. I have provided the text as
a resource alongside this video. This is a two sentence
example that I love, because it has a good story behind it. When I first started teaching at Stanford, some of my students were taking a course
on statistics in another department. And the textbook for that course was about three inches thick,
I'm only exaggerating slightly. The students struggled with that course. I think largely attributable
to that hard to read textbook. And I ended up teaching an alternate
course in statistics for them, which was the generation of
my teaching statistics at Stanford. Here, I'm showing a couple of sentences
from the introduction of that textbook. This is not even any of
the Technical material but it gives you a sense of why that book
was unnecessarily long and hard to read. In particular, I'm going to highlight the
problems that this passage has with verbs. We'll also clean up some sentence clutter. The first sentence reads,
the fear expressed by some teachers that students would not learn statistics
well if they were permitted to use canned computer programs has not been
realized In our experience. All right,
what's the subject of that sentence? The subject is the fear. It's a really long subject, though. Because we don't get into the main verb or
the predicate until has not been realized. So this is an example where the authors
take too long to get to the main verb of the sentence and
then the verb is a boring passive verb. Also this is an instance where
we have got a noun the fear which could have been
an exciting verb to fear. Now look at the second sentence
it has the same issues Again we have this
incredibly long subject. The subject is the monitoring
with all of this extra description about
the monitoring afterwards. And we don't get to the main
verb until revealed. Which is also a boring verb. Notice again that monitoring is a noun
that could have verb, to monitor. I'll just point out a few other
issues with this passage. Notice the use of negatives. They would not learn statistics,
that has not been realized. Last week we talked about turning negative
constructions into positive constructions. And here's an example where you can
see just how awkward those nots sound. So we should try to edit those out. Also, in the second sentence,
you get this hedge word. No appreciable change in
student' performances. Be careful with hedge words. Scientists love to put the hedge words in,
but they are often unnecessary and
raise all sorts of questions. When I read that hedge word,
it opens up a can of worms for me. I'm like,
this was written by statisticians. And what do they mean by
no appreciable change? Does that mean there was a change and it just didn't achieve
statistical significance? What are they trying to bury in that word,
appreciable? So be careful. If there was really no meaningful change, then just say there was
no meaningful change. Get rid of the hedge word. So here's what I edited this down to. Many teachers feared that the use
of canned computer programs would prevent students
from learning statistics. We monitored student achievement levels
before and after the introduction of computers in our course and
found no detriments in performance. Notice how I turned the nouns fear and
monitoring back into verbs, feared and monitored, which allowed me to get the
subject of the sentence and the main verb. Close together,
at the beginning of the sentence. And I also cleaned up the language a bit. Notice how it reads
much more smoothly now. Here's another example, "Review of each
center's progress in recruitment is important to ensure that the cost involved
in maintaining each center's participation is worthwhile." This example and
the rest of the examples in this module are all real examples from
papers I was editing. Here, we've got another long subject. Right?
The subject of this sentence is review of each center's progress in recruitment. So again,
that problem with very long Subjects. We also have the issue of
verbs turned to nouns. Review is a noun. A review that could have been a verb,
to review. Instead of getting a nice verb review
here, we get that boring verb, is. Boring "to be" verb. We also have some empty,
vague descriptors like "important" and "worthwhile." These are vague because
what specifically makes it important? What makes it worthwhile? Try to avoid empty words like that. Be specific. We also have some clunky phrases
like involved in maintaining. That sounds a little awkward. What I did to edit this one is instead
of saying the review is important to do. I made it an imperative. We should review each
center's recruitment progress to make sure its continued
participation is cost effective. Notice that instead of saying worthwhile, which is vague, I'm saying cost effective,
which is more specific. This is specifically what we're going to
be evaluating about these centers. You could probably even strip a few
more words from this sentence, but it's a big improvement
on the first version. Here's another example. It should be emphasized that these
proportions generally are not the result of significant increases
in moderate and severe injuries, But i n many instances reflect mildly injured
persons not being seen at a hospital. As I read this out loud,
you can hear that it's awkward, right? First, we get this kind
of dead weight phrase. That clearing of the throat,
it should be emphasized that. We can cut that completely. The fact that you are writing
about something in your paper, means you're putting emphasis on it. Then we get these proportions,
it's a little bit vague. Here the authors are referring back
to something they've been talking about in a previous sentence. But, it would be helpful if they
used a more, Formative adjective. I'm actually going to change
this one to shifting proportions because that's what the authors
are referring to here. There is a shift in proportions, they are seeing more severe in moderate
injuries and fewer mild injuries at the hospitals with a shifting
proportion We then get an adverb, remember I've told you to cut adverbs so
we're just going to cut generally. Doesn't add anything so we can remove it. We also get some wordiness, the result of. That can just be shortened to due to,
we also get In many instances which also can be cut or
shortened and you could just say often. You probably also heard those nots right? Not the result of. not being seen in a hospital. You can hear how awkward that sounds so
let's try to turn those into positives. Let me get a little bit
of an awkward to be verb. Not being seen at a hospital. That's a little bit awkward so
let's change that. You don;t actually have the context here,
so to edit this, you just need to step back and kind of ask yourself,
what is it the authors were trying to say? They're trying to explain an observation,
that all of a sudden hospitals are reporting more severe injuries and
less mild ones. What they're telling you is that this
shift may not reflect a real increase in modern In severe injuries,
but rather might have to do with people with mild injuries just not
ever checking into a hospital. And it may be doctors are deciding not
to admit milder cases into the hospital to save money. So I Rewrote this one
to shifting proportions in injury severity may reflect
stricter hospital admission criteria rather than true increases in moderate and
severe injuries. Notice that I got rid of that it
should be emphasized that, the nots, the awkward phrasing, and I boiled it
down to the main point, the possible explanation for the shift in proportions
That the authors have observed. Here's another one. Important studies to examine
the descriptive epidemiology of autism, including the prevalence and changes in the characteristics of
the population over time, have begun. All right, what are some of
the problems with this sentence? Notice, again that the subject,
and name verb, are too far apart. The subject of that sentence is,
the studies. We don't get to the main verb, until way
at the end of the sentence, have begun. so we need to fix that. Also again, watch those vague
fluff words like "important". In this case, it sounds like the others are saying
that these studies are important but that might imply that there are other
studies out there that aren't important. And it also raises the question,
what makes them important? And who's judging that they're important? And what do you mean by important? So watch those kinds of fluff words. We also get this. This changes over time. Did you notice that? This is redundant since you cannot
have changes that are not over time. Changes, by definition,
always occur over time. So changes over time is kind
of like successful solutions. Like we saw last week. Finally, the of the population,
at the end. That's vague. Unless you're going to specify
a particular population, then of the population is just too vague. It doesn't add anything,
so we should cut it. So I edited this one to, Studies have
begun to describe the epidemiology of autism, including recent changes
in the disorder's prevalence and characteristics.Notice I've moved the
verb, have begun, way up in the sentence. I also condensed "examine
the descriptive epidemiology" to "describe the epidemiology"
note the use of the verb there. I also get rid of "important" and
I drop "of the population", so it's much cleaner and more Direct now. Here's another example. There are multiple other
mechanisms that are important but most of them are suspected to
only have a small impact Or are only important because of impact
on one of the three primary mechanisms. We don't have the context here,
but you can figure it out. In the previous sentence, the authors
must have talked about the three primary mechanisms and in this sentence they're
trying to qualify That there are other mechanisms at work, but there not going
to devote much attention to them. That's the gist. Lets go through and
see what things we can edit. First of all notice that there are I told
you last week that you often cut out. There are, altogether. This is one of those instances
we can cut out there are and just jump right into
multiple other mechanisms. And then we get important. I've already told you before to
watch out for that fluff word. We can get rid of that word important. We don't need it at all. Here the word important in a way
Is actually contradictory, because the authors are saying in one breath that
these other mechanisms are important, but in the next breath they're saying,
they only have small impacts. Those two things don't dovetail, so let's
just again remove the word important. I also what to get rid of this
boring to be verb, the 'are' here Instead of saying multiple mechanisms are,
we could say multiple other mechanisms play a role, play a role [INAUDIBLE]
and then we get to, most of them are suspected
to only have a small impact, that's very wordy,
are suspected to Is needlessly wordy and it's also a hedge word that
we probably don't here. We don't need to hedge. We're really saying they have small
impacts so there's no need to hedge. So we could say, multiple other mechanisms
and then let's just dive in and be really direct. Mulitple other mechanisms
play only a small role. If we say play only a small role
we can get rid of all of this. Play, we'll change this to only a small role. Or are important because of impact and one of the three primary mechanisms,
well we can condense that a little bit. We can say multiple other mechanisms
play only a small role or work by impacting one of
the three primary mechanisms. Get me get rid of that important again and
because of impact. We can work by impacting or work, By impacting, One of the three
primary mechanisms. So it all boils down now to multiple other
mechanisms play only a small role Or work by impacting one of
the three primary mechanisms. Notice how much we were able to drop here. And notice, we didn't lose anything
by getting rid of that hedge, that are suspected to,
we really didn't need a hedge in there. Okay, here is another example. After rejecting paths with poor
signal-to-noise ratios, We were left with 678 velocity measurements of
waves with 7.5 second periods and 891 measurements of 15 second waves. You can hear that there's
some repetition in here, there's several things we can get rid of. One thing is, we've got this, after
rejecting paths with poor signal-to-noise ratios, we were I think we can
shorten that just a little bit. I would just say, rejecting paths with
poor signal-to-noise ratios left us with. We can just be a little bit more
direct and drop a few words. That does make that subject
a teeny bit long here. But I actually think
it works in this case. And then the fact that you rejected them
left a certain number of measurements. And we can condense this description of
the measurements a little bit we've got some repetition here so left 678 velocity City measurements of and
let's just say 7.5 second waves. That's a little bit shorter, so 7.5 second waves and 891 891 15 second waves. Let's just get rid of
the extra measurements, we've already said measurements. So we can boil this one down to rejecting
paths with poor signal to noise ratios left 678 velocity measurements of 7.5
second waves and 891 of 15 second waves. All right, here's the next example. It is suspected that the importance of
temperature has more to do with impacting rates of other reactions than being
a mechanism of disinfection itself since ponds are rarely hot enough For
temperature alone to cause disinfection. We have to guess the context a bit here,
but probably in the prior sentence, the
authors were telling us something about the importance of temperature
in disinfecting ponds. In this sentence, now, they're telling us
that it's not that the high temperature directly causes the water to boil,
and directly kills the microorganisms It's not that the heat directly kills
them, rather the disinfection might be happening because the hotter temperatures
speed up other reactions that disinfect. I'm actually going to
reorganise this sentence. It starts with, it is suspected that,
again there's that hedge. Instead of using all those hedge
words you might just say likely or may, And then we get importance,
again that word important. That importance of temperature. Probably the previous
sentence already told us that the temperature was important. So I'm going to just
kind of strike all that. And in fact, I'm going to reorder this
[INAUDIBLE] the part I liked best was at the end here, when it says,
ponds are rarely hot enough for For temperature alone
to cause disinfection. I like just jumping in
to that explanation. We're expecting that maybe
it's the temperature itself that causes the disinfection? And they're right off the bat
saying no that's not the case. So let's start with that
kind of nice direct, I'm going to make that
the beginning of the sentence. And and then, I'm just going to tack on
a little bit at the end that gets to this and the rest of these ideas here. So I'm going to put a semicolon
Ponds are rarely hot enough for temperature alone to cause
disinfection thus, and let's get the rest of the explanation now,
thus the effect of temperature is likely mediated for it's impact
on the rates of other reactions. So does the effect of temperature Is likely mediated and
I like this word, mediated, that gets the idea here that it was
likely mediated, that's a good verb. And then we can just do through
the rates other reactions, and we can get rid of all of this, and I'll just put the complete edit here
without me writing the whole thing out. So ponds are rarely hot enough for temperature alone to cause disinfection
Thus, the effect of temperature is likely mediated through its impact
on the rates of other reactions. Finally, one more practice example. This was actually the last
sentence of an abstract, and so the authors were trying to tell
you what their conclusion was. It's a little hard to get that, because they're being really indirect
here by saying it was a assumed that. We'd rather have something like,
we concluded. It was assumed that is confusing. There is a lot of things we can cut here,
it was assumed that obviously we want to get rid of that all together,
that is just confusing. Then we get to this due to reduced work
At the joints of the lower limbs and less energy loss in the prosthetic leg. Let's be more direct here,
what the authors are trying to say is that the prosthetic leg has an effect that
they discovered Covered in their paper. It seems to reduce the work
of a lower leg joint and to reduce the energy loss in the lower
leg joint compared with a healthy ankle. So let's just rearrange
this to say this directly, so we can just say The prosthetic leg, And we'll say reduces because this is an
observation that they're about to explain. The prosthetic leg reduces work and energy loss We don't need
to repeat lower limb twice. Reduces work and energy loss
compared with a healthy ankle joint. And I'm going to get rid
of the word complex. We don't need healthy ankle joint complex. Let's just say compared with a healthy
ankle joint, so I'm actually going to kind of get rid of this and
I'm going to condense this at the end. So we're going to say compared with,
A healthy ankle joint. And then that observation from the paper
leads them to speculate about something. And we're going to put
the speculation at the end, so I'm just going to tack that on the end. I'm going to add on. Sort of summarizing the rest of
this sentence in short of form, which may lead to layer metabolic
costs during maximum sprinting. I'm not going to write that out,
I'll just shown you the final edit here. So we start by doing direct for prosthetic
log reduces work and energy loss compared with a healthy ankle joint And then that
observation leads the authors to believe that that may lead to lower metabolic
costs during maximum sprinting.