In this next module we're
going to do an active practice exercise about what you just learned
about introduction sections. This is the introduction section from
an article in the BMJ Christmas Issue, which is a humor issue. But it makes a good example. I want you to read the introduction and
identify which sentences give the what's known or background,
which sentences give the what's unknown, and which sentences refers
to this specific study. So go through and figure that out, and
when you are done, restart the video and I will walk you through it. Okay, so hopefully this one
was fairly straightforward. In the very first two paragraphs and
just the beginning of the third paragraph we get a lot of background information,
we get the what's known. So we're told a lot about popular medical
talk shows, the background there. Hopefully you identified all
of those as what's known. There are two places, two sentences
where we get the what's unknown. We get, the quality of information outside
of the news media has not been examined, so this has not been well studied. And in the third paragraph, However,
no research has systematically examined the content of the medical information
provided on these talk shows. Nobody has done a study like this before, systematically evaluating
those talk shows. All right, finally the last sentence
gives us the aims of this study. They say,
Our object was to review the most popular medical talk shows on television, to (1)
determine the type of recommendations and claims given and the details provided,
and (2) search for and evaluate the evidence behind
these recommendations. It's clear that this study
is filling in a gap, because nobody has ever looked at
this research question before. So hopefully that one was
fairly straightforward. Now we're going to do our second exercise. This was a study on self-citation. The authors wanted to know if
men cite their own papers, self-cite more than women. And I want you to do the same thing
as we did in the last exercise, I want you to identify the sentences
that give the known, the unknown and then those that
are pertinent to this study. So now pause the video and complete
the exercise and then restart the video. All right,
hopefully you've got that most of the, the first three paragraphs
are giving a lot of back ground. We learned that self-citation
is an important question. They tell us why this matters, we need
some background on that to explain that citations counts are an important part
of promotion in an academic career. And so if men are self-promoting more
effectively than women, perhaps that contributes to the gender disparity we
see in faculty hiring and promotion. Then in that third paragraph we
get the previous literature. So we're told that there was a 2013 paper
that looked just at citations in general, not at self-citations, and
that one did find a gender difference. Men's papers in general
are cited more than women's. And then there was one previous paper
from 2013 that looked specifically at self-citation, and
they did find a gender difference. They found that men self-cited
1.5 times more than women. But here let's move to what's unknown. There's just a one sentence
statement of what's unknown here. The problem is there have been
few studies on this, right? We only have one that specifically
looked at self-citation and gender. And that one study that
looked at self-citation and gender looked at only a few disciplines
in a relatively small number of papers. So this hasn't been look at broadly. And then finally, hopefully you were able
to identify the last two sentences as those pertinent to what this
specific study is going to do. Here we examine gender
differences in self-citations across 24 broad academic fields
with hundreds of subfields and several million scholarly papers
with over a million self-citations. So they're going to fill in the gap
of the previous literature by doing a much larger, much broader study. And they're also going to
look at one other thing, which is how the gender
gap has changed over time.