In this next module, we're going to talk about the discussion
section of your manuscript. The discussion section,
in terms of the writing, gives you the most freedom of any
of the other written sections. It gives you the most chance to
put your good writing on display. Of course, since there is so
much flexibility, it is also the most challenging to write. So follow your rules for good writing, all
the rules that we've been talking about in this class, and you'll really
shine in your discussion section. Remember, that we were represented
the introduction section as a cone that went from broad to narrow. In the discussion section,
you are inverting that cone. The introduction section ends
with the question asked. The discussion section starts
by answering that question. So you start with the most narrow piece
of information, and then you broaden. You start by answering the question asked,
then you're going to support your answer with your own data and with other
people's data from the literature. So you give all the lines of evidence, say how your results fit into
the context of the literature. Then, you're going to
defend your conclusions. This is the obligatory limitations
section of your discussion. You want to anticipate the criticisms
that readers may have and defend your conclusions
against these criticisms. And then at the end,
you're going to go very broad. You want to give the big-picture
implications of your research. In other words, the discussion section
should impart what your results mean and why should anyone care. This last point is important. You need to make sure that readers outside
of your immediate niche area in science can understand why your study matters. You have to make them care. Here's one way of
organizing the discussion. It's a bit disciplined specific
exactly what goes in that discussion, but here are the general
elements that you should have. You want to start the discussion section
with something like, we found that. And then you answer
the question that you proposed at the end of the introduction section. You're going to explain what
the data mean at a very high level, and you want to clearly and explicitly
state if the findings are novel. You may also have some
key secondary findings. Oftentimes, when we do
a study to find one thing, we also find some other interesting
findings in the process. So you might state those
other key secondary findings. After you give all your findings,
you're going to put it on contexts. Here's where you can get into some detail
that I didn't want you to put in your introduction section. You can give possible mechanisms or pathways that might explain what
you're seeing in your data. If the research was on human subjects, you might talk about the potential
underlying biological pathways. You also compare your results
with other people's results. How do your results fit with
the existing literature? Do your results confirm others' results,
or are they contrasting? Then, as you're getting towards
the end of your discussion, you need to have at least one paragraph
on strengths and limitations. I'll talk a little bit more about
the limitations paragraph in a bit here. You also want to spend some
time saying what's next. Here's where you can talk about results
that need to be confirmed in future studies or unanswered questions or
future directions. Then, you want to give this so what,
the implicate, speculate or recommend. This is where you're saying, hey,
why should anyone care about my findings. If you're doing something
in the basic sciences, tie it to humans,
tell your readers why they should care. And then, it's nice in the discussion
section to have one paragraph at the end where you'll have a strong conclusion. Some journals have a separate section for
a conclusion. But if your journal doesn't, just wrap up
your discussion section by restating your main findings and giving some kind of
final take-home message for your readers. Here are some tips on
the discussion section. Again, showcase your good writing,
use the active voice, tell it as much as you can like a story. Start and end with the main finding. The first sentence of your discussion
section should be something like, we found that, where you give an answer to the main
question, aim, or hypothesis of the paper. And then you want to wrap
up your discussion section by restating that main finding. It's okay to repeat it because you
want to emphasize it to your reader. Be very careful in your discussion section
that you don't travel too far from your data. Near the end of the discussion,
it's okay to give some speculation, big picture implication. It's okay to step away from your data and
speculate a bit towards the end. But when you're drawing
your main conclusions, you need to make sure that you are telling
the reader what you actually found, not what you hoped to find. This is one of the reasons that
I like to look at tables and figures first, before I read
anybody's discussion section. I want to make my own judgment
about what I think the data show. Authors sometimes see only what
they want to in their data. So make sure you're not reaching
too far from your data. Another common problem is that
sometimes authors will start discussing things that
they don't have data on. So they'll go on for paragraphs about something that they
didn't even measure in their study. So again,
don't travel too far from your data. Another key tip on discussion sections is
pay attention to the limitation section. One major mistake authors make in
the discussion section is that they don't spend enough time crafting a good
strengths and limitations section. They often just write whatever
generic limitations they can think of. But the mark of a good paper, for me, is when authors have anticipated
my criticisms and concerns. As I'm reading a paper, I'm thinking
about all the potential holes in it. If I then get to the limitations
section in that paper and the authors proceed to address all
my major concerns, I'm impressed. Even if they don't have a good answer for
those limitations, just the fact that they recognize them goes a long way to
improving my confidence in the study. That's the mark of a good paper for me. Because what you see more often is that
authors write the limitations sections too generically. They just throw in a bunch of none
specific boiler plate limitations that could apply to any study. And they fail to acknowledge
the limitations that are most critical to the validity of this specific study. If you can anticipate what the reader
will criticize in your paper, if you can anticipate that and beat them
to the punchline, that goes a long way to increasing reviewers' and
editors' confidence in your study. And then finally, the last thing on
the discussion section is that make sure your take-home message is clear and
consistent. Again, I think this gets to that
oftentimes we want the data to show one thing, we were hoping for
a certain result. And the data don't quite show what we
want them to, but we still are torn. And we want to tell our reader
that the data showed that. We still believe in the hypothesis,
and we end up waffling. So make sure you're clear, and
consistent about your take-home message. All right, now, I'm going to give you
some example discussion sections. So I've been using this Academic Spam
Study, I'm going to use it again here. It's quite short, the discussion section,
but it follows the format of a typical discussion well, so
it makes a good example. I'm just going to remind you that at the
end of the introduction section of that paper, they gave
the objectives of their study. In the Academic Spam Study,
we investigated the amount, relevance, content, and
suppressibility of academic spam emails. So I'm going to be looking, For answers
to each of those questions about amount, relevance, content and suppressibility at
the beginning of the discussion section. So here's their discussion section,
they start with the Academic Spam Study shows that mid-career academics in
New Zealand receive, on average, 2.1 spam invitations each day to
publish papers and attend conferences. So we learn that the amount
is 2.1 invitations per day. If you keep reading along here
you'll also learn that 16% of spam invitations are duplicates they found. And then in terms of relevancy they
found that 83% were of little or no relevance to the recipient. And in terms of supressibility, the authors found that these
emails are hard to suppress. So they answered basically all of
the questions that they set out to answer right there in the first paragraph
of the discussion section. Then they jump into the strength and
weaknesses of the study. I usually would put this a little bit
closer to the end, but it's okay. So the BMJ Christmas issue
which they went right into some potential strengths and weaknesses. They're trying to be a little bit funny
here, I won't read through it but I'll leave it there for
you if you want to. So we see our obligatory
limitations paragraph. Then we get the context
with other studies, they talk a little bit about
comparison with other studies. Again they're being a little tongue
in cheek and a little funny here. I'll leave that for
you to read on your own. And then we get the final paragraph,
implications and future research, the kinds of things I told you, you should have at the end
of your discussion section. Again, they're trying to be a bit funny,
I'll just read through it here. What they're trying to do here is to
suggest that there should be future research on academic spam and
then they write it in the format. They write it to mimic or
mock academic spam, so they are trying to sound
like a spam email. Nobel and prestigious colleagues,
we are enthralled by prospect to notice the grammar, of novel
research focus of academic spam, so we make a proposition to improve
enlightenment of evidence. We wish greatly to start journal and convene scientific meeting that focus on
academic spam, so illustrious colleagues can form interdisciplinary webs,
of scientific rigour to advance knowledge. Maybe we will christen soon Journal of
Advances in Interdisciplinary Academic Spam and launch with alacrity
the First Annual International Symposium. Once we identify publisher and conference
organizer we will email academics to join this exciting novel adventure,
honorable colleagues, stay tuned. Often in the spam there's a lot
of exclamation points like that. So they're trying to be funny and
sound like or copy a, make fun of email, spam email. So that's the entire discussion section,
it's just four sections or four paragraphs long but it has all the
elements of a typical discussion section. So we'll now jump into a non
BMJ Christmas issue example. So again, before I can show
you the discussion section, I need to show you the end of
the introduction from that same paper. So this was a study looking at low
fat diets versus low carb diets. So it was a hot topic a few years back. They performed a study designed
to test the hypothesis that severely obese subjects
who have other problems, either diabetes or pre-diabetes with a,
have a greater weight loss. And b, would have that weight loss without
detrimental effects on heart health, while on a carb restricted diet
compared with a low-fat diet. So they think that the carb diet
might help with weight loss, but they also want to check and make sure
that when you're eating a lot of, remember this diet has a lot of steak and
cheese. That when you're eating a lot of steak and
cheese that it's not having some negative effects on overall heart health
even if they lose weight. So those were the questions asked
in the introduction section. So we are hoping that the beginning
of the discussion section starts with answers to those questions. Indeed, we get to the discussion section. The first sentence of
the first paragraph says, we found that severely obese subjects
with a high prevalence of diabetes and pre-diabetes lost more weight
in a six month period on a carb restricted diet than on a fat and
calory restricted diet. So in that very first sentence,
they've started with, we found that, and then they answer the question a, the first
question in their introduction section. I am only going to highlight certain
parts of the discussion, just because, of course, discussions are long, so I'm not
going to present the entire discussion. But that's the start of
the first paragraph, the start of the second paragraph
answers the question to b. The second main question of the study
was whether the low carb diet is bad for your cardiovascular health because
you're eating too much steak and cheese. And they found that it wasn't, subjects in
the low carb group had greater decreases in triglyceride levels than did
subjects in the low-fat group. And nondiabetic subjects on the low
carb diet had greater increases in insulin sensitivity,
that's something that's good. And subjects with diabetes had a greater
improvement in glycemic control. So now they've answered question b. Not only did the low carb diet have no
detrimental effects on heart health. The people on the low fat
diet actually seem to have done better in terms of heart health. Their lipid levels are good,
their insulin sensitivity is good. Again I'm going to just highlight
a certain parts of this discussion and then go on which is the part I'm not
going to show you that go on to put their findings in the context
of previous studies. For time sake, I'm not going to go into
those but I'm going to jump to paragraph 4, because I want to jump to that
limitations paragraph to dishighlight that I think they did a good job here of
pointing out important limitations. One thing is that many participants
in this study were taking other drugs in addition to doing
the weight loss program. They were taking medications to lower
cholesterol and lower blood pressure. And this could definitely affect
the results of the study. Obviously, that's going to affect
whether their lipids look bad or good. So the authors bring up that limitation,
and they even tell us that they addressed that
limitation by doing analysis where they excluded subjects on these medications and
it appears that the results were robust. Down in the sixth paragraph they also
tell us about another key limitation. Many participants dropped out,
the attrition was high. Of course,
if not many people could follow the diet, it's really hard to draw conclusions. The diets just may be non-starters for
a large number of people. So I think that was also an important
limitation that they did address well. And this discussion section
was seven paragraphs long, just to give you a sense
of how long they might be. Here's the last paragraph,
paragraph seven. Notice that they restate their key
findings in the last paragraph. They restate their answers to
the two questions they were asking. Taken together, our findings demonstrate
that this population lost more weight during six months on a carb-restricted
diet than on a low fat diet. So that was answer to question a. The carb-restricted diet led to greater
improvements in insulin sensitivity that were independent of weight loss,
wasn't just because they lost more weight. And a greater reduction
in triglyceride levels in subjects who lost more
than 5% of their weight. So they've just answered question b. They've just restated what they
said in the opening two paragraphs. But you want to sum up,
because that's the really, that's the big take home messages in the
study that answers the questions asked. Then they go on to give some other big
picture things, they give a caution. They want to say, this doesn't mean
that everybody should wash out and go on a low carb diet,
because in the grand scheme of things, the weight loss was still pretty
small even in the low carb group. Also, there was a high drop out rate which
means the diet is hard to stick to, So based on all that, they end with
a take home message to physicians. This study proves a principal and
does not provide clinical guidance. Given the known benefits
of fat restriction, future studies evaluating long-term
cardiovascular outcomes are needed before a carb restricted
diet can be endorsed. They don't want to
overstate their findings. They're saying, there's still some
questions to be answered and we don't want to translate our findings yet
into an actual clinical recommendation. So they ended here with the restatement
of there main findings, but then kind of the caution,
a big picture caution. One more example,
these was the paper comparing men and women with regard to self-citation. I'll remind you that what was at
the end of their introduction section, their goals were to compare the number of
self-citations in men versus women and they also wanted to look a serve of
secondary aim to trends in this gender gap over time. So, they ended the introduction with their statement of purpose what
they are trying to do. So now, we're hoping that they
start the discussion section telling us what they found with
regards to those two things. The discussion actually starts with a one
sentence recap of the size of the study. I think they are trying to really
emphasize the study's major strength here. It was a much bigger study
then anybody else has done. But then in the second sentence,
they answer the questions asked. So one, in the last two decades for
every seven self-citations by men, women cited themselves four times. A ratio of 1.7. So, how big was the gender gap? They found a gender gap of a ratio of
1.7 and what about the trends over time? This ratio rose sharply in the 1960s and the 1970s, and
then sort of plateaued in the 1980s. So, they start their discussion
with their main finding. I'll just point out that they
have some secondary findings. They were weeding through
a big database here. They found some other interesting things. There was wide variation about
self-citation in different fields. It turns out that almost 10% of
all citations are self-citations, which I found interesting and
surprising that's I thought a big number. And then they give us the gender gap
in terms of in absolute terms and in the statistics,
given in a slightly different way. So, these are some secondary findings. So remember that sometimes
after the primary finding, you're going to give some important and
interesting secondary findings, then the authors launch
into possible mechanisms. Why might men self-promote
more than women? That one possibility is that maybe
self-promotions seems were acceptable for men than women in our society. So I'm not going to read through all
of this, but here are some possible reasons that might explain the gender
gap that the authors are seeing. Later, we get to the limitations. The main limitation cited is that the
authors can't say definitively why they're seeing this difference. They're pretty confident
that the difference is real. They've looked at a big data set. They're pretty confident that
the finding is done well, but they can't really say why. They can't claim to know
the causal mechanisms. They're putting that as
their big limitation and then the authors give several
paragraphs of implications. I'm not going to put them
all in the slide, but I'll show you the last paragraph. So, the final paragraph ends with
their main take home message. Historically, women's academic
contributions have been undervalued. And the fact that self-citations
are more prominent in men than women, maybe one more reason to think that
maybe metrics that involve citations shouldn't be the only way that
we're measuring scientific impact. So this is really giving sort of the big
picture implication of their work if self-citations are, and self-promotion if men are better at
self-promotion and do more self-citation. Maybe we should be looking at metrics
other than citations when it comes to academic hiring and promotion. So, maybe giving less weight to
citations could be one strategy for reducing gender equity in
the academic community. So, they're ending here
with the big picture. One last thing I want to just point out,
I was reading a discussion once and this was the first two sentences or
three sentences of the discussion section. So, don't start your discussion like this. It started with this meta-analysis is
subject to a number of limitations. So, don't start your discussion
section with the limitations. Start with the we found or
this study shows and then bury the limitation section
several paragraphs down. Finally, similar to methods and
results and introduction, you're going to use the rule for
verb tenses. You're going to use the past tense
when referring to things that are already completed, study details,
results, analyses and background research. So we found that, subjects may have
experienced, Miller et al found. But you're going to use the present tense
when talking about what the data suggest, because the data are still
suggesting that. So the greater weight loss suggests. The explanation for
this difference is not clear. Potential explanations include. All of those would be
in the present tense.