This is the second of four optional
modules that share a demo edit of a student's work from a previous course. This second optional module
is particularly interesting because it brought up a good conversation
in that previous course about an issue that we're going to be talking about in
this course as well, which is plagiarism. It turned out that when I did the demo
edit of this essay for the class, a couple of savvy students in the class
noticed that the author of these essay had actually plagiarized a couple of lines,
a couple of sentences, from a press release that was
written about this research. And it was actually a really good
teaching moment because we got into a discussion about
what is plagiarism. It's not okay to just lift lines from
something that other people have written. I just want to point it out though
as you're watching this demo edit so you watch out for
those plagiarized instances. And also start thinking about how to
avoid plagiarism in your own work. It's actually fairly interesting when
you hear me go through the demo edit, a couple of times I'll say something
like I really like this sentence, or I really like how the author put this,
I like this language. And it turns out that actually those
are the instances that the author had plagiarized from the professional writer,
from the press release. So I probably should have
recognized that the style in those instances was actually different
than the rest of the piece. Just to give you a few examples
before you watch this demo edit, the author wrote,
antennas serve as electronic reigns, injecting small charges into
the roach's neural tissue. The charges trick the roach into thinking
that the antennas are in contact with a physical barrier, which effectively
steers them in the opposite direction. So all of that language was
lifted from the press releases. There's some other smaller instances, uses
an electronic interface to remotely steer cockroaches, creates
a mobile web of sensors. There's some other pieces of
sentences that were also lifted. It's great teaching moment just
to be aware of plagiarism. And we're going to be
talking more about that and how to avoid that later in this course. So now pause the video, read through
the paper one or two times and then restart the video and
I'll walk you through the edit. So now that you've read through the paper,
it's an interesting paper. It's got a cool concept here. We're using cockroaches as
biological robots, biobots. So it's got a really nice
hook on this paper as well. And I'm just going to go through and
edit it again looking for the overall structure, and
also editing things line by line. So I'm going to go in and
make a few edits here and there. I'm going to rearrange a few things. So one of the things you might have
noticed is that the author has a lot of technical details about the device
in the paper and that's fine. They do a good job. I was able to understand everything
even though there were a lot of technical details. So it wasn't bothersome to have so
many technical details. But I thought maybe we could
reserve one paragraph for all of the technical details. So I'm going to move things
around just a little bit, to put all sort of the technical details
about the device in a single paragraph. So now I'm going to through again,
and there's a few places I might delete a few words here and there,
and move a few things around. So in general, it's reading really nicely,
and these are just a few things to streamline it, and
kind of reorganize it just slightly. So that the flow is just slightly better. So if I'm going to go through
the first paragraph says, scientists are still looking for
small size robots. There're few words I can edit here. So scientists are looking, I don't think
we need the still, are looking for, and then we get small size robots. I actually think we don't need the word
size there because small implies size. So we could just say scientists
are looking for small robots. That can navigate in dynamic and
unknown environments. And this is a really nice language
dynamic and unknown environments. That's really good language. And I'm actually going to add one little
piece to that because at the end of this paragraph, they gets to this idea
about survivors and earthquake. And that's a nice little detail
that really grounds the reader, you kind of see how
important this topic is. So I added just a little bit here. I added such as the aftermath
of an earthquake. I got that little thought in early,
and that means I'm going to be able to cut some material from
the end of this paragraph. So it's just going to
streamline things a little bit. This challenge inspired these researchers
from North Carolina State University to use cockroaches as biobots. I didn't change much here. I just streamlined this, just slightly
to turn cockroaches into biobots seemed like a slightly
stronger verb than use. You could even probably come
up with a better verb there to transform cockroaches or
something like that. And then we get they developed a wireless
biological interface that uses an electronic interface to
remotely steer cockroaches. This is a little bit too wordy for the first paragraph where you're
really trying to draw the reader in. And so I actually don't think we need
all of this biological interface, electronic interface,
they're kind of vague. And the reader, the author is going to give us this
in the next paragraph later on. So I don't think we need all that. So the best concept, the best wording from
this sentence is the idea of the remotely steering the cockroaches. I thought if we can just take
those couple of words that would convey exactly what it is these
researchers are trying to do. They're trying to remote
control cockroaches. So I don't think we need these
things about the interfaces yet, we can leave that for the next paragraph. But I'm going to start
the next sentence with their remotely controlled cockroaches. So that gets the concept
across really fast. Immediately you know what
we are talking about. We are talking about remote
controlled cockroaches. We don't need to know it yet
how it happens, but that's the idea to make remotely
controlled cockroaches. And then I like this idea
of a mobile web of sensors. That's a really nice way of putting it. So I'm going to kind of just start with
their remotely controlled cockroaches and go right into that idea. So their remotely controlled
cockroaches could someday, I think I'm going to put the word someday
because it's we're not there yet. This is still preliminary, could someday
serve as a mobile web of sensors. And we don't need to repeat, that uses
cockroaches, so we can get rid of that. A mobile web of sensors that collect and
transmit data. And we've already got the idea of
earthquakes in here, so I'm just going to say collect and transmit data from hard
to reach places, something like that. And actually that idea of
the survivors of natural disasters, that’s a really compelling detail. I'm going to leave that for the end of the
piece so that we have something to end on that kind of wraps it back to
the beginning of the piece. So this shortens up the first paragraph,
just a little bit so we get right into it. We don't get too much details, but
we have a good picture in our mind of what the researchers were
trying to achieve here. Then we go into the second paragraph. Cockroaches have antennas. I really appreciate, by the way, that this author made a good effort to
use dashes and semicolons and colons. So it's nice to see that they obviously
watched the videos and thought carefully about it and try to implement some
of these punctuation techniques. So it always feels great for a teacher to see somebody putting
those things into action. I'm going to change a few things. So instead of dashes here, I think
probably this is a little extra detail. So I'm going to put it in parenthesis
rather than dashes because maybe the reader doesn't care what
the antennas are actually called. So cockroaches have antennas to sense
I like that sense versus to sense. But that can sense,
that's a little stylistic. We actually probably don't
need the colon here. I do, again,
appreciate that they tried to use a colon. But actually we can just go right
into this it's a very simple list. So, the colons actually not needed there. So cockroaches have antennas
called cerci that can sense tactile temperature and humidity. And one thing I just
want to point out there, there was a little bit
of non-parallelism here. So, temperature and humidity are nouns. Tactile is actually an adjective. So we want to make that parallel by
making this first item in a list a noun, so I'm going to call it a tactile input. And then we get researchers. And we might as well say
the particular researchers. So I'm just going to use their last names. So those two researchers Latif and
Bozkurt, I'm pronouncing that right. And then we can use these antennas
to drive the cockroaches by sending a series of
electrical pulses to it. So I thought here it would be
a good place to put in creative, the fact that they developed a device,
so created a wireless device. So let's just say you're
up from what they did. The bulk of what they did, the gist of it, is they created a wireless device
that attaches to these antennas. So let's get that concept early on,
too, so it's easy for the reader to picture what's going on. So these are wireless devices that
actually attach to the antenna. So that's get that early in. In the piece so that the reader has a very
concrete picture of what's going on here. And can deliver small electrical pulses
that drive the cockroach. So this is kind of a high level summary
of what their device does I like to put the driving the electrical,
the electrical pulses drive the cockroach, rather than putting those concepts
together the other way around. So that's why I'm putting the electrical
pulses before the driving. I think it just works
slightly better there. So we now get kind of
this high-level summary. We get a wireless device that
attaches to the antennas and can deliver electrical pulses
that drive the cockroach. So that's really summarizing
exactly what this device does. Then we're getting a lot of kind
of details about the system, I'm actually going to set those details
off, and make that into a new paragraph. So, let's have one paragraph that has all
of the technical details about the device. For the second paragraph let's keep it to
a high level summary of exactly kind of what the device does. And I really like this sentence that
they have down in this third paragraph. The charges trick the roach
into thinking that the antennas are in contact with a physical barrier. Which effectively steers them
in the opposite direction. When I read that, I finally got
exactly how this device works. So, I thought that detail
is really important that, to have early on because it really tells
the reader exactly how this thing works. So, I'm going to leave the second
paragraph at just that. It high level summary of what
the device does and how it works. And its an easy to read summary so the reader can immediately
picture how this thing works. Then we can go into that actual details
about the technical parts of the summary. So the system consist of, I like device, let's talk just about the device for
the moment. So the device consists of a micro
processor with Zigbee interface electrodes and a battery. The user controls the micro processor
wirelessly using a Zigbee transceiver. I'm actually going to
connect these two ideas. So, the device consists of this, and then the user controls the device
with this Zigbee transceiver. I don't think we need to say wirelessly
again because we already said it was a wireless device. So we don't to repeat ourselves,
I'm going to end the sentence there. The fact that the microprocessor sends
electric pulses to the cockroaches antenna using electrodes and the cockroach moves. Guess what?
We've already said that in the second paragraph, so we don't need any of that. So now we have talked about the device
itself, the microprocessor, the transceiver, the electrodes,
and the battery. So now this is a good place, actually, to move up something that
the author had here below. The author talks about
the particular microprocessor that was used in the device. So it seems to me that it would be
perfect to discuss that right here. So I'm going to move that up
from the third paragraph. So now,
as long as we're talking about the device, let's talk about
the microprocessor in the device. So the researchers evaluated,
I'm going to change evaluated to tested, I like that slightly better,
tested two microprocessors. I don't think we have to say
that control the electrodes. That's implied, so
we can just go right into this. We know there is a microprocessor,
here are the two ones that they tested. And then they CC2530 was better
because of these reasons. I'm guessing that that
means they incorporated, that they tested two micropasages but
they ended up using the the CC2530. So let's say they incorporated the CC2530 in their final device
due to these factors. In their final device
due to its low weights, its Zigbee module connectivity
obviously that we import. It has to connect with the Zigbee and then we get to any of the availability
of 21 general purpose I/O. I wasn't quiet sure what that is. So, I'm guessing here,
I'm completely guessing here. And greater number of I/O parts. That was an exactly parallel
either on I or ports maybe. So, I mean,
I'm picturing like little electrodes here. So, I'm not sure that I've
got this quiet right. So, I'm going to highlight that. So that the author can look at that and
put it in a way that I can understand. I don't think we need to know
the details about the battery, so I'm actually going to cut that detail. So they incorporated the CC2530 in their
final device due to its low weight, it Zigbee module connectivity. And the greater number of I/O ports,
because they said there were 21. So I'm guessing a little bit and
hopefully I got that right. But if not, I'm highlighting it so
the author, when in their revision, can put something there that's similar but
is accurate if that isn't accurate. So then we get to exactly what
cockroaches the researchers here used. And so
I'm going to just use their last name. Latif and Bozkurt used
the Madagascar Hissing cockroach. I don't think we need,
during their analysis, right. We just need to know that they
used it because of, again, I appreciate the author using the colon. But we probably don't need the colon
here because it's a fairly simple list. So, because of its larger size, so
speed long life span and robustness. And I like to have a comma
at the end of a list. So that all looks good. Before the experiment
starts they anesthetized., I think I'd just say we could
kind of collapse this into, after anesthetizing. I spelled that right. After anesthetizing
the cockroaches by cold treatment, we can just go right into that for
45-60 minutes. They need to anesthetize them
before they attach the electrodes. They attached one side of electrode, we can go right into to that,
so they anesthetized them. After they anesthetized them, then they
attached one side of each electrode? Maybe one side of the electrodes? I thought maybe it's one side
of each electrode, again, I would double check that
detail with the author. There, but
it sounds a little better to say, once out of each electrode
to the antennas. And I really like the wording here
to serve as, electronic reins. I thought that was a nice
way of putting it, but in fact we've already said
that in the second paragraph. That it delivers the small charges to
the rodents, the roaches neural tissue. So actually, I'm going to get rid of that. We just need to know that
after they anesthetized these bugs they attached
the electrodes to the antennas. And we don't need to repeat again that it's still delivering
these small electrical pulses. Although I like that
Visual of electronic rain. So if there was some way to work that
back into maybe the second paragraph, I'd encourage the author to do that. There was some nice language. Now we get, in the next paragraph,
we get to the actual test. So they made the device and then they were
testing the device on actual cockroaches. And this is one part where
I want some more details. I want to know more about what happen when
they actually tested the cockroaches. So I'm going to say,
in tests of the system, I'm going to be very explicit and
let the reader know. So we developed this system,
we also tested it. So in test of the system, cockroaches fall in an S-shaped trajectory
drawn on the laboratory floor and spent 81 seconds with 10% success
rate to complete the route. Now, I'm wondering if that's an error. I'm going to push off this
last parting thought and make that into a new paragraph. because this test in the system
really deserves its own paragraph. I wonder if that was suppose to be 100%
success rate to complete the route. Because if it's only a 10% success rate,
I'm thinking that that's not very good. So I would highlight that and
ask the author if that's maybe an error? And if it was supposed to be 100%? Or if it's only 10% success rate, I'd
like to know a little bit more about why they're still enthusiastic
about this system. And we need a lot more details here. So what, What else did they test? Was that the only test they did? Give me some more details
about exactly what happened, how promising the results were. because this is the proof
of principle of the device. So we need a lot more details here
about that part of the experiment, so I'd ask the author to add that in. And then this last sentence,
this will become the concluding paragraph, will lead into the concluding paragraph. So this finding opens the door to
scientists to start using insects and biobots. And there's a little bit of
grammatical error here in biobots. I might just kind of cut it there. And then it's a new thought that
the system's weight is still a problem. So this one I thought I needed
a little bit more setup for because I'm not sure why
the weight is still a problem. It seems like the cockroach is pretty
small, they have a pretty small device. So why is the weight still a problem? So I feel like we need a little
bit more detail about that. You could put that in this
second to the last paragraph. Or maybe start the class paragraph with,
this system is still too large because, give me the why the system needs
to be shrunk even further. So further research needs to reduce
the weight of the system because, I need to know why. because I'm not sure why this
isn't already small enough. And then maybe a but to transition if
we're kind of saying that the negative and the drawback and what the challenge is. Maybe you need a but there to transition to that final thought
that this is something still really cool. But this finding opens the door to scientists to start
using insects as biobots. I would say as biobots
rather than in biobots. And then, you could end there, maybe its nice to add one last
kind of parting thought here. So again, I mentioned that I cut
out of that first paragraph, the specific reference to
the survivor of the earthquake. So maybe we could add something at
the end to wrap back to the beginning. Some day, armies of cockroaches, May be the best hope for rescue for natural disaster survivors or
something like that. Natural disaster. So maybe something like that,
kind of get some hook back. Someday, armies of cockroaches
may be the best hope for rescue for natural disaster survivors. So, turn it again, kind of wrap
it back to that first thought. Just gives it a nice ending to
tie it back to the beginning. So now I think it's reading really well,
it has a nice setup. We've got a nice introduction
that pulls you into the piece. We got an overview of this device
without too many technical details. We get a nice paragraph that delivers
all the information about the technical details. We get how they actually
attach it to the cockroaches. And then, we get some information
about the first test of the system. That's where I'd like the author to
add a little bit more information and then we get kind of a parting thought. And maybe some of
the challenges that remain.