In this next module, we're going to
talk about writing the abstract. This will be a short module, because
after you finish writing your paper, it should be fairly easy
to write your abstract. In fact, the word abstract
means literally to pull out. So what you're going to do to write
your abstract is to pull out snippets from the rest of your paper. It gives readers an overview of
the main story of your paper. If you're writing the abstract last,
it should be fairly easy to write because you're just highlighting bits and
pieces from each section. It's usually short,
which means you can use your skills in cutting clutter to make
sure you fit within the word limits. Like tables and figures,
the abstract has to stand on its own. And it's the part that most often is,
people read. Sometimes people only read
the abstracts and not the full text. One major caution I have on the abstract. One mistake I see commonly is that
authors often write abstracts prior to writing the paper. Because maybe they want to present
some data at a conference. So they rummage through their data
quickly and throw together some abstract, just so
they can present it at a conference. Then months later, when they actually
would go to write up the paper, they're like,
I already wrote that abstract. Great, I can just plug
that abstract in my paper, and I'm going to start
my whole paper there. Once you have something written, it feels
like, wow, I've already got this written, I should use it. Why waste work? The problem with this is when you threw
that abstract together months before. You probably hadn't nailed down all of the
data analysis and the tables, and figures, and the story of your paper. It was probably very preliminary. That abstract that you wrote
months ago is simply not going to fit into your final analysis. My recommendation is throw it
in the garbage and start over. Start over on the abstract using
the material in your newly written paper. Don't just try to modify it,
that abstract that's months old. Again, it's really easy to write an
abstract after you've written the paper, so I recommend always
writing the abstract, last. Just throw out any old abstracts
you might have hanging around. What should go in your abstract? Again, it's essentially just pulling out
little bits from the rest of your paper. It's good to start with a one-sentence
statements of some background. Give the reader some context,
maybe motivate the importance of the work. Then, you're going to explicitly
state the research aim or question, just like you did at
the end of the introduction section. You're going to use
that exact phraseology. We asked whether, we hypothesized that or
we speculated that. Then you're going to give a quick
summary of the experiments that you did. Obviously, you're not going to
have room for a lot details, but give an overview of the methods. You can pull all these pieces right out of
the method section, but make it minimal. Then you're going to give a couple of key
results and just a few important numbers. Not too many. Then you're going to
have a brief conclusion. You're going to answer
the question that you asked or the hypothesis that you
were testing in your study. You're going to give some kind of
take home message about whether or not your hypothesis was proven. For example, did you find that breast
cancer and smoking are associated? And then one more thing that I
think is very important to put in. You need to have as Mimi Zeiger puts it,
some kind of implication, speculation, or recommendation. So what that means is that, there's one
sentence at the end of your abstract where you're going to go a little beyond, and
give readers the why should I care? What's the implication,
why does this research matter? I'm often scanning abstracts for articles
to write about for the lay public, and I need to quickly discern the real
world relevance of that research. So make sure you put that implication,
speculation, or recommendation in at
the end of your abstract. Now, abstracts come in two forms. They may either be structured
where the journal says, hey, we want you to have something for each of
these specific pieces with subheadings. Like, introduction, results, methods,
the subheadings are fairly obvious. Or you may have a free form abstract,
the structured ones are obviously a lot easier to write, I'm just going to through
one example of a structured abstract. This is from that same BMJ Christmas
issue study on email spam to academics. So it's a structured abstract so they go
through the background, the objectives. The aim of the study was to assess
the amount, relevance, content, and suppressibility of academic spam
invitations to attend conferences, or submit manuscripts. So we're getting both the background and
the questions asked. We get several pieces on
the experiments done. What type of study was it? What was the setting? Who were the participants? These were five intrepid academics,
just the five people who got together. Then we get some details about
the main outcome measures. That's important but
that's also part of the experiments done. Then we get the results found. At baseline, recipients received an average of
312 spam invitations each month. Unsubscribing reduced the frequency of
the invitations by 39% after one month, but by only 19% after one year. So the suppressibility is not so good. Overall, 16% of spam invitations were
duplicates and 83% had little or no relevance to the recipients. So we're getting to the amount and
relevance of the email spam. And then the content, spam invitations
were characterized by inventive language, flattery and exuberance. And they were sometimes baffling and
amusing. Those were the main results,
addressing all of the content relevancy, suppressibility and amount that they laid
out as their objectives for this study. And then we get a big pictured conclusion,
academic spam is common, repetitive, often irrelevant and
difficult to avoid or prevent. So that's their take home message. That's one example of an abstract, but they're all going to be,
hopefully, it's easy to write.