.
Well, we're getting ready to enter a phase of medical neuroscience where we're going
to be talking about the senses of sight, sound, and smell.
And there's no experience that brings all that together than sitting around a camp
fire, holding a brain. So, I look forward to these next few
sessions with you and if you have an opportunity to be near a campfire over
these next couple of days to weeks you might want to have the experience I'm
having right now where the sense of heat and warmth and the sound of the crackle
and the dance of the flame and the smell of the burning wood all brings to mind
these incredible feelings of, of warmth and relaxation and comfort.
Quite an amazing bit of neuroscience behind all of that.
So, I look forward to exploring some of these topics with you and see you next
time around the campfire. Welcome again to my home.
It's a beautiful day here in Central North Carolina.
And I'm pleased to begin a series of sessions with you talking to you about the
visual system. And our focus today is on the eye.
What I have to share with you today pertains to several of our core concepts
in the field of neuroscience. We again are confronted with the
complexity of the brain as the body's most complex organ.
And, we again are going to be looking at the structure and function of circuitry
that's largely determined by our genes. And these circuits will be foundational
for the operations of the visual system in the human brain.
And I can hardly think of any topics in the whole domain of sensory neuroscience
that has fascinated more human beings over the course of our history than the sense
of vision. And so I think when we come to this topic,
we certainly are in a position to appreciate how a brain itself gives us
this amazing capacity to wonder how vision works.
Our learning objectives today begin with the factors in the mechanisms that account
for focusing an image on the retina. So, I want you to be able to describe
them. I want you to be able to identify the five
basic neuronal types that are found in the retina and I want you to be able to state
the roles of each in neural processing. I want you to be able to talk about
sensory transduction in the visual system. So, I want you to be able to characterize
the molecular processes that underlie what we call phototransduction.
And lastly, I want you to be able to discuss the responses of retinal ganglion
cells to the onset and the offset of light and the relevance of these receptive
fields for the detection of light and shadow.
Well, let's begin by looking at the anatomy of the eye.
Well, I would just direct yo ur attention to some basic anatomy here.
So the, the eye is comprised of several layers and two chambers and some
structures that are important for forming the sharply focused image on the back of
the retina that are found within the eye itself.
So in the anterior side of the eye, we have the cornea.
The cornea is a structure that is responsible for actually most of the
refraction of light that happens as light passes into the eye.
So, roughly 80% of the refractive power of the eye comes from the cornea, the
remaining 20% comes as light passes through these middle structures near the
interior third of the eye including An optical lens.
And this lens can change shape through a process that we call accommodation.
We'll say more about that in just a moment.
Well, the space defined by this anterior portion of the eye is called the anterior
chamber. And this anterior chamber is filled with a
fluid called aqueous humor. That aqueous humor is produced by some
cells that sit right about in this region here and that fluid then leaves what we
call this posterior chamber between this ciliary muscle and the lens itself.
And that fluid then fills up this anterior chamber and it helps to support the
curvature of the cornea. Now, that fluid is typically drained by a
trabecular network found in this lateral margin of this anterior chamber.
Now, should there be a problem with the absorption of this fluid from the anterior
chamber, then that can build up pressure within the eye.
And that pressure has a way of damaging the peripheral parts of the retina.
And there's consequence in that eye one might tend to lose peripheral vision.
Well, let me try to illustrate the consequences of this if I may, using a
photo from my photo album. This was a memorable trip my family took
many years ago. We're in one of the most beautiful sights
in all of North America. This is Lake Louise in Alberta, Canada.
And if a person viewing my family in this scene had glaucoma sadly they would not be
able to truly appreciate the full majesty of this scene because their visual field
might very well be reduced to just the center of their gaze.
Well, let's now turn our attention to the process of, of focusing the image on the
back of the retina. And this is a process that we call
accommodation. So, accommodation requires the active
adjustment of the shape of the lens that sits in the anterior portion of the eye.
So here what we see is an illustration of the lens in one of two conditions.
In the unaccommodated vision the lens is relatively flat.
So, this would be appropriate for far vision.
And then over to the right, in the accommodated configuration, notice how the
lens is considerably fatter and more round.
So, this will increase the refractive index of the lens, and this would be
appropriate for near vision. Well, how does this work?
Well, this is where the active elements of this ciliary body come into play.
There is a muscle, the ciliary muscle, that surrounds the lens.
And this muscle is attached to the lens through a series of fibrils called zonule
fibers. And the way this muscle works and the way
it interacts with the lens is, is really quite ingenious.
As this muscle contracts, it makes the aperture smaller that surrounds this lens.
And as this muscle contracts, then the tension on these zonule fibers can relax
and consequently active contraction of the ciliary muscle leads to a rounding up of
the lens and an increase in its refractive power.
When that muscle relaxes, then it returns to a wider aperture that causes tension on
the Zonule fibers. And as a result of that tension, then this
lens ins pulled more towards a flattened configuration.
So, one other bio mechanical element here that makes all this work, is the lens
itself. So, the lens will tend to ball up into a
rounder configuration if it were to be cut free of the zonule fiber.
So, the elasticity of the lens itself is what gives it the capacity to achieve this
more rounded configuration, which is appropriate for near vision.
Now, adjustments to the shape of the lens are not the whole story when it comes to
accommodation. There is also adjustments to the pupil
itself. So, the pupil is basically the space
created by the iris. So here you notice the, the iris.
Is a muscular structure that creates the space in the middle.
And that is the dark spot that you see when you look deeply into the eyes of
another person. Well, of course what we're looking at is
darkness in the interior of the back of the eye.
The iris performs this very important function of minimizing optical aberration.
Now, the iris also serves to achieve that optimal balance between the amount of
light that's necessary to activate the neural elements in the back of the eye,
called the retina, and over activating them all or bleaching them.
So, we have an exquisite mechanism that allows inputs from the retina to drive
circuitry in the brain stem to constrict that muscle and make moment to moment
adjustments in the diameter of the pupil. This is called the pupillary light reflex.
And we'll spend a bit of time talking about that circuitry in a different
tutorial. Well, I think we're ready now to consider
those neural elements at the back of the eye and we will spend much of the rest of
the tutorial talking about those elements. What I'm referring to, of course, is the
retina. Now, I want to make an important
embryological point, as we begin to consider the retina and that is that the
retina is really considered to be truly part of the brain.
And the reason is that the retina is diencephalic, which is to say the retina
is derived from the developing forebrain, specifically the diencephalon.
So, as the diencephalon begins to differentiate at the posterior part of the
prosencephalon, something called the optic vesicle forms.
And this is an outward pouch that we see from the lateral margins of the
diencephalon. And this pouch grows out to meet other
tissues that together form the eye. The retina and an important layer of
tissue just behind it, called the pigmented epithelium, are derived from
this diencephalic tissue. So one might wonder why then do we call
the optic nerve the optic nerve, if it's really an extension of the brain?
Well, I think that's a legitimate question.
But the important point I want you to take away here is that the retina provides us
with a unique opportunity to look into the eye of a patient and actually see tissue
derived from the brain. And that gives us an opportunity to
examine that tissue as well as the vascular supply to it and perhaps gain
some insight as to the status of what's going on deeper in the cranium.
All right. Well, let's look now at the retina itself.
And as I mentioned, there are two kinds of tissues here that are derived from this
optic cup that constitute the retina. Right at the back of the eye is a tissue
called the pigmented epithelium. This is a very dark tissue because of the
presence of a pigment. And I'll talk more about that particular
layer of cells in just a moment. The rest of this is what we call the
neural retina and it's comprised of five basic types of cells.
And I want you to notice something about the organization of those cells relative
to the eye itself. So, the back of the eye is out here
somewhere. Okay?
So, the pigmented epithelium is against the inner surface of the sclera, which is
what we call the white part of the eyeball that we see from the outside.
And in order for light to activate the cells that do the job of
phototransduction, it has to pass through this entire neural retina because the
phototransduction process is out here, right up against the pigmented epithelium.
So, this is where phototransduction happens.
And that may see, seem somewhat surprising that light would have to pass through this
tissue before striking the photo pigments that transduced that energy and generate
an electrical signal. But we think this is the way it is for a
very important reason and it has to do with the relationship between these
photoreceptors and this pigmented epithelium.
So, if we look more closely at that relationship, what we discover is that the
outer tips of our photoreceptors make intimate contact with this pigmented
epithelium. And that's critical for the function of
the pigmented epithelium in the whole process of keeping these photoreceptors
competent to transduce photon energy into neural signals.
The pigmented epithelium is involved in recycling the discs of membrane that
contain the photopigments. And we know that from experiments that
allow us to trace the movement of discs from a more proximal position to a more
distal position. And what we find is, that eventually, the
discs are completely engulfed by this pigmented epithelium.
And that's important in recycling the photopigment that's otherwise bleached by
the interaction with photons. So, this raises a rather serious problem
that can happen with trauma. And that is what can happen when the
photoreceptors are detached from this pigmented epithelium.
So, this can happen with a sharp blow to the head.
It's a particular problem and people who are in sports that are subject to a blow
to the head and it's certainly something that can happen with a motor vehicle
accident or some other trauma to the head. So, retinal detachment prevents this
intimate relationship between pigmented epithelium and photo receptor.
And as a result, the photoreceptor no longer has a chance to renew the
photopigment and recycle its disk membrane.
So now, lets consider the rest of the cells that comprise the neural retina.