Welcome to this tutorial on the Visual
System. But specifically, I'd like to talk to you
in this session on Central Visual Processing.
We're going to talk about some of the most wondrous, and, and most interesting
aspects of cortical physiology that will highlight once again the complexity of
the brain among the body's organs. We will encounter some circuitry that's
genetically determined and that circuitry will form the foundation for visual
processing in the brain. And some of the topics we will consider
today are just things that just fill me with a sense of awe and wonder at what
the human brain can complex and that sense of wonderment is what drives my own
personal curiosity to try to understand how the brain works.
I have several learning objectives for you today.
I want you to be able to describe the distribution of the axons of retinal
ganglion cells to the major processing centers in the forebrain and the
brainstem. And then I want to focus on, what's going
on at the level of the forebrain, specifically, in the primary visual
cortex? I want you to be able to discuss the
major receptive field properties that we discover when we record electrical
signals from neurons in V1. I want you to be able to discuss, in very
general terms, the functions associated with those parts of the visual cortex
that are beyond the primary area. We call those extrastriate visual
pathways. Alright, let's once again consider the
distribution of the axons of retinal ganglion cells.
So the ganglion cells of the nasal retina send their axons through the optic nerve,
they cross the midline, and project to targets in the diencephalon and in the
midbrain on the opposite side of the brain.
Those retinal ganglion cells from the temporal retina send out axons that grow
through the optic nerve, and as they approach the chiasm, they remain on the
ipsilateral side of the brain. And as a consequence, once we get visual
signals posterior to the optic chiasm, now, each optic tract contains all the
information about the opposite side of the visual world that's seen by each eye.
Now, the major target of this visual information with respect to the image
forming aspects of vision is the Lateral Geniculate Nucleus and we see that
nucleus illustrated here the posterior and inferior or lateral aspect of the
thalamus. It's the major target of retinal ganglion
cells with respect to vision or image formation.
And from the Lateral Geniculate Nucleus arises our optic radiations that work
their way around the lateral ventricle to supply the upper and lower banks of the
calcarine sulcus, that's where we find our primary visual cortex.
Now, here to the right is a histological view of the primary visual cortex that
was generated by a good friend and colleague of mine back in the day when we
were both working as postdoctoral fellows together.
And this is a beautiful histological view of a myelin stain, through the cortex
that forms the calcarine sulcus. So here in this space, here's the
calcarine sulcus as labeled there. And, you'll notice, if we look into the
thickness of the cortex with the myelin stain, that there's this striking dense
band of myelination that runs right through the middle of the cortex.
And one feature of this band that is especially striking is how it's so
clearly defines a region of cortex here. One can recognize exactly where this band
has its termination. And the early anatomists such as
Korbinian Brodmann look at this part of the cortex and concluded that the
presence of this stripe, which is called the stria of Gennari, must signify that
there's something extinct about this bit of the cerebral cortex.
So Brodmann labeled this Brodmann's area 17, or that's how we know it today,
he just called it area 17. And it's also known as the striate cortex
because of this histological presentation of what we call the stria of Gennari.
Now, one interesting aspect in the history of neuroscience over the last 5
or 6 decades or so, is that probably, no single area of the brain has attracted
more interest, more attention than this striate cortex.
And one reason is that it's within the circuitry of the striate cortex that we come
best to understand this computational function of cortical microcircuits.
You will recall, I trust, what I suggested as an easy way to remember the
function of the cortical microcircuitry, the ACC of the cortical column.
the A stands for Amplification of the thalamic input.
The C, the first C stands for Computation, that is, the emergence of
new functional properties that weren't present in the input signal that is
amplified by this cortical circuitry. We'll see some wonderful examples of
computational properties that emerge as a result of the operation of cortical
networks. and then, the final C is Communication,
as the signals are then disseminated along higher order pathways.
We'll see an example of that here, as well.
So the ACC of the canonical cortical microcircuit was truly first established
by studies of this part of the brain, the visual cortex.
Two of the leading investigators that has made all of this possible are David Hubel
and Torsten Wiesel, who very deservingly were awarded the Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine in 1981 for their foundational work on the physiology, the
anatomy, and the developmental plasticity of this part of the brain.
It's, it's really difficult to overstate the influence of these two scientists on
the development of modern neuroscience. There were others at the time that were
beginning to eavesdrop on the nature of neurosignals in the cerebral cortex, most
notably at that time was Vernon Mountcastle, who was studying cortical
columns in the somatic sensory parts of the brain.
But for the visual system, it's really David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel that paved
the way for generations of neuroscientists who would follow,
including myself, who have been fascinated with trying to understand the
physiology of the circuits that arise in this part of the brain and how they might
be shaped by our visual experiences in early life as we open our eyes and begin
to encounter the world. Well, I could go on about Hubel and
Wiesel and their influence over my career and the career of many of my colleagues.
But we will press on and turn our attention to some of the receptive field
properties that Hubel and Wiesel discovered in this part of the brain.
And I'd like to share a little bit from my own research lab some of the ways that
we are continuing to build upon what Hubel and Wiesel taught us and hopefully
extend our understanding of this fascinating part of the brain.
Now, as we get into this discussion, let me remind you that at earlier stages of
visual processing, such as in the retina and even in the Lateral Geniculate
Nucleus, cells respond best to small spots of light.
They have receptive fields that are organized into center and surrounding
regions that are circularly symmetrical. So what we see in the thalamus is very
much similar to what we saw in the retina.
There's no major transformation of the nature of visual representation from
retina to thalamus. However, if we record from cells in the
visual cortex and try to stimulate with the same stimuli that works so well for
retinal ganglion cells or Lateral Geniculate Nucleus neurons, we see very
subtle and not terribly robust responses. But rather, if we change the stimulus, if
we replace the small spots of light with large edges of light or bars of light,
and then move those bars in one direction, or another at one orientation,
or another, let's say horizontal or vertical, then we are very likely to
record robust responses in the primary visual cortex.
And this is exactly what Hubel and Wiesel did.
And what they discovered are two very important computational properties of
this cortical network, orientation selectivity and direction selectivity.
Let me illustrate what they found by considering cortical orientation
selectivity. So, Hubel and Wiesel did experiments such
as this, using animal models, and, this highlights the importance of animal
models in modern neuroscience. Of course, we are highly concerned for
the welfare of all animals that are used in science or those animals that are kept
as pets by private individuals as well. We need to treat these animals with the
highest standards of humane concern for their welfare.
And that's certainly the case generally speaking, in the field of neuroscience.
I know in my own work with animals and research, the standard is to keep these
animals as comfortable and as healthy as we possibly can, keep the animals
socially engaged supported in their nutrition and in, in their physical
activity. And in the conduct of the experiments,
the goal is to eliminate the experience of pain.
So consequently, when experiments are done on animals, they are anesthetized
before any intervention is done. And while the experiments are ongoing,
the animals are very carefully monitored to be certain that they are appropriately
anesthetized in order to ensure that there is no pain experienced by the
animal. And in the case of terminal, terminal
experiments at the conclusion of the study.
The animal is simply put down with an overdose of anesthetic.
Well, this is the kind of experiment that was done by Hubel and Wiesel using cats
and young kittens. And an illustration of one such
experiment is shown here. We have an animal that's been
anesthetized and prepared for surgery, and it's anesthetized to the point where
it's feeling no pain, but not so deeply that there is no brain activity at all,
otherwise, of course, that would be incompatible with life.
So the animal is alive, but it's deeply anesthetized, much like a person
undergoing surgery. Well, a microelectrode is implanted in
the visual part of the brain of this animal, back in the occipital cortex.
And from that microelectrode, action potentials are recorded from neurons
while these animal's view light stimuli that are projected on a screen in front
of the animal. As I mentioned, what Hubel and Wiesel
discovered is that cells in this part of the brain respond especially well to a
bar of light when it's moving in a particular axis of motion.
And what they might even find is that some neurons respond very well when the
bar is moved in one direction, but not at all when the bar is moved in the opposite
direction. So these two properties together are what
we refer to when we talk about orientation and direction selectivity.
Orientation selectivity refers to the preferred response to a bar of a
particular orientation versus another. And direction selectivity refers to the
preferential response in a particular direction of motion, but not in the
opposite direction. Okay, so, here in the middle panel, we
see a representation of data recorded from one such experiment.
And the microelectro tip happens to be sitting next to a cell that responds best
to vertical stimuli. So, when the preferred stimulus is
presented, there is a robust discharge of action potentials from that cell.
But as the orientation or as the angle of that stimulus is shifted away from
vertical, the response gets less and less.
After a series of such stimuli that are presented around the full cycle of
possible orientations, it's possible to define a tuning function that plots the
response of the neuron across a range of stimulus presentations.
And for this neuron, what we find is that there is sharp tuning for angles near
vertical. Now, there's not absolute tuning, there
is some response off vertical. But by far, the best response is within
about 15 or so degrees of the preferred orientation, vertical in this case.