Welcome to a set of tutorials on the
visceral motor system. I'd like to take this set of tutorials
in, in three parts. this first part, I'd like to give you a
bit of an overview including some discussion of the functional divisions of
the visceral motor system. And then we'll have session on the
hypothalamus, a very important part of the brain's means of controlling visceral
motor activity. And then lastly, I'd like to illustrate
some of the principles of how visceral motor activity is integrated with sensory
input, as well as somatic motor output, in the governance of one important
function, and that's the function of controlling the bladder.
Well, this topic of visceral motor integration and visceral motor control
relates to some of our core concepts in the field of neuroscience.
You're very used to hearing me assert that the brain is the body's most complex
organ. But that is a fact that I hope is not
lost on any of us as we pursue a deeper understanding of how the brain governs
the body within which it resides. We'll also be talking more about
circuitry today, that is genetically determined, but still subject to life
experiences and the modifications that use can feed back into a functioning
nervous system. Alright, so in this first part of our
tutorial on the visceral motor system, I have three learning objectives for you.
First, I want you to be able to describe the anatomical organization of the
sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the visceral motor system, including
the sources of preganglionic innervation and the location of the postganglionic
visceral motor neurons. So, as this objective implies, there are
important differences between these two major divisions of the visceral motor
system that I want you to be able to have a discussion about, perhaps with a
friend, even a family member who may be curious as to what you're learning in
Medical Neuroscience. I want to you to be able to characterize
the major functions of the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions.
Now, that's not to say that I want you to account for sympathetic and
parasympathetic governance of each visceral-motor effector system in the
body. that would be beyond the scope of this
course. But rather, I want you to be able to have
a discussion that highlights the general characteristics of sympathetic
activation, parasympathetic activation. And one great way to do that is to pick
out a subset of those visceral motor effectors that are particularly
instructive for you, and think about how do these two systems interact to govern
the activity of that system? And then finally, I want you to be able
to identify and discuss the neural centers in the central nervous system
that regulate the outflow of activity in the preganglionic fibers of the visceral
motor system. So we want to back up to higher centers
in the brain and understand, how does the brain govern the coordinated output of
these two divisions of our visceral motor system?
Well, let's now begin by considering in broad overview the functions of the
visceral motor system. Well, what the visceral motor system does
is it maintains the internal environment of the body, and it regulates the
activity of the visceral organs, the glands and the blood vessels.
The visceral motor system governs the circulation, respiration, digestion,
metabolism, bodily secretions, thermal regulation and reproduction.
Elements of this system, together with components of the somatic motor system,
are involved in the experience and expression of emotional behavior, and
indeed other dimensions of cognition that have an impact on the internal workings
of our body. Well, I think you're familiar with some
of the basic functional divisions of the visceral motor system.
and perhaps I should pause here and just state that I've been using the term
visceral motor system. You may be wondering, well aren't we
talking about the autonomic nervous system and in-, indeed we are.
these terms for the most part are synonymous.
I prefer visceral motor systems because it allows us to focus on the effector
systems that we're concerned about in this particular session.
That is our visceral organs. There's also an element of autonomic
nervous system function that involves the somatic motor system.
So, I don't want us to conflate thinking about the viscera with thinking about
somatic motor effectors. That's a point we'll come back to in the
third part of this tutorial. Just so that you're not thrown off by my
terminology, so from here on out I'll be referring to the visceral motor system as
those aspects of autonomic function that pertain to the governance of visceral
effector systems. Okay, with that said, we basically have
three functional divisions of our visceral motor system.
We have a sympathetic division which is involved in energy mobilization.
There is a parasympathetic division, which is involved in energy conservation.
So, already you get a feel for the complimentary actions of these two
principal divisions of the visceral motor outflow.
But there's also a third division that I'll just touch on very briefly.
and that has to do with the neural networks that govern the activities of
our gastrointestinal tract. We call this the enteric division.
So this is a system of neurons that function in something of a
semi-autonomous way. I'll say more about this, this system in
just a minute. And what this system does, is it
coordinates our digestive reflexes. Well again to think in very broad big
picture terms, the coordinated activity, of these three divisions of the visceral
motor system, is really all about two principle kinds of, of functions.
one is homeostasis, so this is a, a wonderful term coined back in the early
part of the 20th Century by a great physiologist by the name of Walter
Cannon. And what Cannon had in mind with
homeostasis, is the constancy of the internal environment.
That is working to keep the body more or less at a set point of some sort.
Well, homeostasis is what our bodies are about arguably most of the time.
But we couldn't survive very long if this was the only mode of action of our
visceral motor system. indeed, there are times when in order to
restore that proper balance, we have to change, we have to push the body into
rather emergency action. And so this concept is what we might have
in mind with this term allostasis which was coined more recently by a
contemporary neuroscientist name Bruce McEwen.
An allostasis refers to imposing a change of the internal environment, so that we
can eventually cycle back and re-establish homeostasis.
And I think these two terms, homeostasis and allostasis, they capture a sense of
what the visceral motor system is all about.
It's about trying to maintain the constancy of the internal environment,
and the capacity to radically alter the state of the internal environment when
the conditions demand for such action. So, we'll see some examples of that as we
go, and talk about how these two aspects of this remoter function are, are played
out. Well, before we get into more detail of
the anatomy and the function of our two principle divisions, our sympathetic and
parasympathetic divisions, I just want to mention very briefly the enteric
division. So the enteric division really refers to
a network of neurons that are found in the lining of the gut.
So, here's an illustration that reveals just a small piece of representative
tissue from the lining of our gastrointestional system.
for example this could very well be the lining of the small intestine.
And what I want you to notice are these networks of neural processes that run
through particular layers of this tissue. So they are actually two networks we, we
call each network a plexus. So in close association with the muscular
layers of the gastrointestinal system, especially the longitudinal muscles that
are, are responsible for moving the contents of our gastrointestinal tract
along through a pattern of muscle contraction that will propel in a
wave-like fashion. The contents of the gut along the GI
tract. this plexus is called the myenteric
plexus, or Auerbach's plexus. So it's responsible for coordinating this
rhythmical contraction of our longitudinal muscle.
Well, there is a deeper plexus, and this plexus is found in close association with
the mucosa that lines the gastrointestinal system, this is called
the submucous plexus. And this submucous plexus also known as
Meissner's plexus, this is a network of neurons that coordinates the secretions
of the various glands that are very important in mediating digestion, within
the gastrointestinal system. Now these two networks of neurons, they
can function in a semi-autonomous way, that is, if one were to have damage to
the spinal cord or the nerves that supply, this network, then this network
can still function, however the functions are not very well coordinated with
respect to the needs of digestion. So there definitely is input to this
enteric division of the visceral motor system from both sympathetic and
parasympathetic sources. never the less, there's a certain degree
of autonomy that we recognize in the functions of this enteric division.
Okay well that's all I'm going to say about the GI system.
we certainly could say more. There is a, a rich degree of, of
neurobiology in just about every way associated with the activities of neurons
in these networks. but we'll turn our attention then to the
sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions and then the means by which the brain
regulates these two sets of outflows from our visceral motor centers within the
brain stem and the spinal cord.