Now let's take a more close look at
the lateral surface of the human brain. And what we're looking at here is the
right hemisphere of our brain specimen. And to begin with,
let's find the central sulcus. The central sulcus is a long,
roughly straight sulcus, except for a distinctive S-shaped bend,
that represents the hand in the somatic motor and
somatic sensory cortex. But otherwise,
the sulcus extends from the dorsal midline to the lateral fissure in
roughly a straight trajectory. All of the cerebral hemisphere to
the front of that central sulcus is the frontal lobe, and the frontal
lobe is comprised of a precentral gyrus, and then three gyral
structures that run more or less in the long access to the hemisphere. Near the dorsal midline is
the superior frontal gyrus. Near the middle of this frontal
lobe is the middle frontal gyrus. And then, along the inferior margin of the frontal lobe is
the inferior frontal gyrus. So again, superior, middle,
and inferior frontal gyri, that are separated by
two meandering sulci, an inferior frontal sulcus,
and a superior frontal sulcus. Now let's look behind the central
sulcus at the parietal lobe. So again, here's the central sulcus,
and the posterior boundary of the central sulcus is the long,
mostly straight postcentral gyrus. And then just behind that postcentral
gyrus, there are two gyral formations. Now there are subdivisions that we could
name, but for our purposes, we'll keep it simple and talk about these two structures
as an inferior parietal lobule, in this region of the parietal lobe,
and then a superior parietal lobule, which is up here along the dorsal
midline of the hemisphere. And between the superior and
inferior parietal lobule, is a deep sulcus of the parietal lobe
called the intraparietal sulcus, and that sulcus runs in the long
axis of the hemisphere, approaching the central sulcus
at nearly a right angle. Now, just behind the parietal
lobe is the occipital lobe. And it's somewhat obituary
how we define the boundary between the occipital lobe and
the parietal lobe. It almost doesn't make sense to do so, based on the function of this part of the
cerebral cortex, but based on the anatomy, as we view the lateral surface,
it is helpful to define that boundary. There's a deep sulcus,
that's more obvious along the midline, that comes out to the lateral surface
of the brain in this location. That's the parieto-occipital sulcus. So if we can draw an imaginary line
from that parieto-occipital sulcus, down to a notch formed by the way the dura tends to restrict the development of the
inferior surface of the occipital lobe, we have a boundary that roughly divides
the occipital lobe from the parietal lobe. This notch that we can see
right about in this region, that's called the pre-occipital
notch because it helps to define the interior boundary
of the occipital lobe. And now let's go inferior to the lateral
fissure, which is located right here, and explore the features
of the temporal lobe. From the lateral surface of
the hemisphere, we see three long, straight, parallel gyri,
known as the superior, the middle, and
the inferior temporal gyri. I want you to notice that this
arrangement of three, long, straight, parallel gyri is quite similar
to what we found in the frontal lobe. So, between these three gyri
are two sulci that are more or less straight and parallel. There's the superior temporal
sulcus between the superior and the middle temple gyri, and
then the inferior temporal sulcus between the middle and
the inferior temporal gyri. To get a better look at
the inferior temporal gyrus, we'll need to angle
the temporal lobe just a bit so you can see the lateral surface curving
into the ventral aspect of the brain. We'll see the rest of the gyri and
sulci, the temporal lobe, when we explore the ventral view
of the brain in another lesson. Now if we were to compare
one hemisphere to the other, we're looking now at the right hemisphere,
and if we looked at the left hemisphere, we would see all of those same gyral
features, although there may be a few aspects of this lateral view
that could be a bit different. One of them concerns this deep
fissure called the lateral fissure. This lateral fissure
tends to be longer and straighter in the left hemisphere
compared to the right. And this, we think, accommodates
some of the specialized regions of the posterior temporal lobe and inferior parietal lobule that have to
do with processing human language. So, in most of us,
our lateral fissure is longer and straighter in the left hemisphere,
as compared to the right hemisphere, where that fissure often takes a sharp, upward bend, rather than extending
further back in more of a straight line. So that's a brief tour of the lateral
surface of the human brain.