Welcome to this tutorial.
This is the first of three devoted to the fascinating topic of synaptic plasticity.
in this tutorial, we're going to talk about two particular mechanics, one
called long-term potentiation or LTP for short, and the other, long-term
depression, LTD. This tutorial will be followed by one
that will frame up our understanding of plasticity as is occurs in real brains
one spike at a time. And then, lastly, we'll talk about the
famous Hebb's postulate and how our understanding of synaptic plasticity is
framed up In those terms. Well, this topic relates to several key
concepts in the field of neuroscience and they are enumerated below.
neuroscience core concepts 2, 4, and 8. We will continue to talk about how
neurons communicate through both electrical and chemical signals.
And the plasticity that we'll be speaking of in this tutorial relates to plasticity
of chemical signaling. And the point of plasticity is that it
provides us with a means for life experience to change the nervous system.
So we're beginning to talk about some of those most fascinating topics in the
field of neuroscience. Those topics that pertain to
understanding how the experiences of our lives are transduced into permanent
change in the nervous system. All of this holds great promise for the
future, fundamental discoveries promote healthy living and the treatment of
disease. These topics that we will be exploring in
the next few sessions are really giving us a glimpse into the future of medical
neuroscience as principles of synaptic plasticity are better understood.
So can rational intervention be developed that will harness this amazing plastic
potential of the central nervous system for therapeutic advantage.
And for those of you that are getting into the healthcare industries these are
exciting times. Because, as basic neuroscience progresses
and this domain of understanding these principles, so will our capacity to apply
these principles for therapeutic good for the patients that you'll come to serve.
So, I'm privileged to be a small part of your education that will usher in this
new frontier in the world of medical neuroscience, where we will understand
how to optimize our capacity to change the nervous system of someone who is
dealing with impairment or disease or disability.
Or, perhaps someone without those conditions who wants to optimize their
performance and whatever domain of life is of concern to them.
So, that's what's possible. over the course of your lifetime in your
practice, as we come to better understand the brain basis of synaptic change.
So I do have some learning objectives for you.
I want you to be able to characterize general cellular mechanisms for synaptic
change. In particular, I want you to be able to
discuss the mechanisms of long-term potentiation.
And I want you to focus on two glutamate receptors.
The AMPA or AMPA, subtype of glutamate receptor and the NMDA glutamate receptor.
And I want you to discuss the role of these receptors in the induction and
maintenance in the induction and maintenance of long-term potentiation.
Likewise, I want you to characterize long-term depression, and I want you to
discuss the molecular basis for long-term depression in two important regions of
the central nervous system, the cerebral cortex and the cerebellar cortex.
Well, you may not need any motivation at all when it comes to this topic of
synaptic plasticity, but again, for those of you that are pursuing careers in
healthcare I think it is especially pertinent that you learn these lessons
well. one motivating statement, at least for
me, has come from one of my colleagues at Emory University who's been a leading
thinker and researcher in the translation of basic science discovery in the domain
of synaptic plasticity to intervention with people that are dealing with
neurological disability. So what Taub and his colleagues have
written some years ago in a really excellent review, in Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, he wrote that behavior, that is the sensory and motor experiences
of our bodies, can have a profound influence on the function and
organization of the nervous system... And that this effect can be manipulated
to therapeutic advantage in individuals with central nervous system injury.
So understanding the rules of plasticity will increase our capacity to help people
that are dealing with central nervous system injury and disease.
Because, we will better understand how to take the sensory and motor experiences of
their own bodies use that capacity to reshape the structure and function of
their nervous systems. So let's begin this discussion by making
sure we really know what we're talking about when we use this word, plasticity.
Plasticity simply means the capacity of the nervous system to change.
And, we can think about this concept from a number of different perspectives, and
I'd like to suggest a few of them. I'd like to suggest the temperal frame of
understanding plasticity. Plasticity can be short-term.
Over the course of milliseconds to hundreds of milliseconds to seconds to
minutes. It can be long-term.
It can last minutes to hours to days to even a lifetime.
Just think back for a moment to some of your earliest childhood memories.
It's amazing is it not that that is even possible?
That some formative event changed the function, maybe even the structure of
your nervous system, in such a way that those events can be recalled.
now years later, in my case decades later.
truly a remarkable achievement for a nervous system to have this capacity to
store a lifetime of change. Now, of course, that's not to say that
the process of remembering or recalling does not, itself, induce a new round of
plasticity, indeed it doe But nevertheless, the basic information that
was laid down in the initial event that you and I may be recalling.
is still with us. It's still present in the functional
architecture of our brains. Amazing.
So, our discussion today will begin to get at an explanation as to what may have
changed and how w can also consider plasticity in spacial terms.
That is, where does plasticity occur? Well, plasticity occurs at synapses.
That's what we will talk about today. Plasticity might also occur within the
structure and function of the neuron itself.
That is, it may simply not be a change at the synapse, but perhaps a change in
different compartments within the neuron and the same could be said of glial
cells. And in particular, I'm thinking about
astrocytes that are important in modulating the activities of neurons
within grey matter. Astrocytes themselves are subject to
plastic responses induced by changes in their surrounding neural elements.
Plasticity can affect the structure and function of entire neurocircuits and
entire systems comprised of multiple neurocircuits operating in series and in
parallel. Imagine the accrued impact of synaptic
plasticity and cellular plasticity throughout an entire neural system.
The change can be profound. That change can ultimately be reflected
in the organization of functional representations we have in the brain.
Consider, for example, the map of the body that we have in our somatic sensory
cortex. That map is constantly being updated as
we change the use of our body, or perhaps, as the body becomes injured.
So, plasticity is a means by which we can constantly update and refresh the
learning and the representation that we store, even across an entire cortical
area. Well with such change pervasive
throughout our organization of neural systems and neural circuits, it's not
surprising then that plasticity should be the bases of basically everything we do
in our nervous system that is predicated upon learning and change.
So, plasticity is the basis of memory, it's the basis of acquiring the motor
skill that you may have acquired in life, be it in athletics or perhaps performance
arts. Maybe it's in a musical instrument
whatever it may be involving the acquisition of motor skill, there's been
some plastic change at multiple places in your nervous system that has made that
skill possible. The same would apply to cognitive skills.
any domain of learning requires that there be some plasticity.
Certainly the development of language or the acquisition of new languages
throughout life. mathematics for example, the ability to
acquire new skills and then apply that knowledge in problem solving.
That's another example of plasticity in action, as would be any of the dimensions
of the performing arts as I mentioned a moment ago.
And finally, again, putting it back into the context of healthcare, adaptation,
and recovery from injury or disability requires plasticity within the central
nervous system. So, let's just review some of the basic
cellular mechanism of plasticity that seem to apply to multiple forms of
plasticity. And we'll see how these are played out in
different contexts. So, plasticity usually begins when neural
activity triggers the activation of postsynaptic second messenger systems.
And those second messenger systems usually involve an alteration in the
level of intracellular calcium in the postsynaptic neuron.
So calcium will be a key index that is used by the postsynaptic neuron to know
which way to go with its plastic response.
So calcium within the postsynapitc neuron triggers the activity of second messenger
systems that often converge on one of two categories of enzymes.
one category is the protein kinase family of enzymes these are enzymes, that
phosphorylate target proteins. And that's often a mean of turning on
that target protein. Another category is phosphatases, and
phosphatases are enzymes that dephosphorylate target proteins.
So, it's this alteration in protein phosphorylation that mediates the early
stages of synaptic plasticity. Where new proteins don't need to be
produced, so, so we've not yet really altered the overall protein complement of
the post-synaptic cell. We've just altered the function of the
proteins that already exist. However, for the long haul, there must be
long lasting change in synaptic strength that's brought about by other mechanisms,
those mechanisms that involve a change in gene transcription.
Well, all of these steps are common to multiple forms of plasticity, and one key
differentiator of one form or another is going to be The level of calcium that's
present in the post synaptic cell. So, pay attention to where the level of
calcium becomes critical for determining what type of plasticity is observed.
Okay so now we're ready to talk about one particular mechanism of plasticity called
long-term potentiation. But before we can, I need to introduce
you to a model system that was foundational for the studies that first
brought to light these mechanisms. And that model system is the slice
through the hippy campus from a rodent Used as an animal model.
So, these experiments can be done, because when an animal is humanely
sacrificed and its brain rapidly removed, tissue slices can be obtained from that
brain and those slices can actually be kept alive for some period of time.
perhaps as long as a day. And during that time, those slices can be
probed with microelectrodes, and axons can be stimulated, and the activities of
cells can be recorded. And this is what was done from slices
obtained from the hippocampus of rodent models, so the hippocampus in the rodent
is in the posterior part of the forebrain.
And is something of a C-shaped structure with part of in the dorsal aspect of the
forebrain, and the rest of it wrapped around the medial margin of the lateral
ventrical as it extends in the posterior part of the forebrain.
Now in primates, of course, the hippcocampus has rotated further down
into an inferior and forward position. So, in primates, the hippocampus would be
found in a position of the medial temporal lobe.
but of course, rodents don't exactly have a temporal lobe.
They have corresponding cortical regions but not a lobular shape per se.
Well, be that as it may, it's possible to obtain sections through this hippocampus
and keeps those sections alive in a dish, if you will, and manipulate the activity
of those cells while recording different populations.
This is all done with microelectrodes. So, there's a particular circuit that you
should be introduced to in order to make sense of the experiments that I'd like to
tell you about and it involves basically a three neuron pathway through the
hippocampus. And it begins with inputs that arrive
into a part of the hippocampus called the dentate gyrus.
And these inputs are coming from the cortex just outside the hippocampus.
And something called the entorhinal cortex, part of the parahippocampal
gyrus, which you may recall from viewing the surface of the human brain from
below. And, these inputs make synaptic
connections on a type of cell called the granule cell.
The granule cell then sends synaptic inputs to a large pyramidal cell that's
found in a region called the CA3 region of the hippocampus.
this large pyramidal cell sends axons to several different places.
One of them is to a different sector of the hippocampus called the CA1 region.
And it's this pathway from CA3 to CA1 that we're going to focus in on and use
as our model system. this axon that goes from CA3 to CA1 is
called the Schaffer Collateral Axon. And it's possible then to put micro
electrodes into this system And stimulate some number of these axons that might be
converging on a pyramidal cell in the CA1 region.
And the experiments that I'd like tell you about are as follows.
A particular microelectrode that is positioned along this pathway is going to
be stimulated. So, over time, there may be a brief
barrage of electrical pulses applied. This may last just a couple of seconds at
a very high frequency and this is called a tetanus.
So this kind of tetanic simulation is what will be used to stimulate a pathway
and induce long-term potentiation. Meanwhile, a second microelectrode can be
positioned to activate a different set of axons that is present and functional, but
just not stimulated with a tetanus. Now, to measure the impact of the tetanus
in the pathway that's stimulated, as well as the parallel pathway that wasn't
tetanized. It's possible just to provide a test
shock, maybe about once every 30 seconds. And then, record from this post
synapticcell, the amplitude of the excitatory postsynaptic potential, and
see what happens to that postsynaptic potential.
Does it stay the same? maybe it increases.
While this is the base, basic experiment that was performed and the results are
shown here. So, Pathway 1 is the pathway that
received that tetanic stimulation. So, before the tetanus, a single
electrical shock gave rise to a particular excitatory postsynaptic
potential of a particular amplitude and a particular bit of rise.
But then, after this tetanus, look at what happened.
The excitatory postsynaptic potential in the same pathway, in response to a single
shock, is about doubled in amplitude. So this is long-term potentiation.
Difference in the amplitude of the response of that synapse to the test
shock between the prestimulus condition and the poststimulus condition.
Something about that brief, tetanic stimulation caused some fundamental
change in the strength of this synapse. So, now, it has twice the impact on the
postsynaptic cell than it did previously. Now, that was for the pathway that was
stimulated with the tetanus. Look at the parallel pathway that was not
tetanized. It's present, it's active.
In response to a single shock stimulus, it gives rise to a excitatory
postsynaptic potential just like the neighboring pathways, only now, before
and after the application of the tetanus to Pathway 1, there's no change to
Pathway 2. No change, no LTP.
Here's another way to look at these data. Plotted here are the responses in these
two pathways to the single test shock applied about every 30 seconds or so, for
about 15 minutes, before the tetanus to about an hour afterwards.
And what we see in Pathway 1 is about a two to threefold increase in the
amplitude of the EPSP over time. Now, there is some decay of this
potentiation over the course of this experiment lasting about an hour.
But nevertheless, after about one hour of time, there is still about a twofold
increase in the amplitude of that EPSP, the excitatory postsynaptic potential in
the pathway that was tetanized. In the pathway that was not tetanized,
there's essentially no change. Now, these initial experiments were done
at a time when slices in a dish could be kept alive for about a day or so.
but what one really wanted to know was whether this potentiation might be a
mechanism of learning and memory over a much longer period of time and that
required in vivo experiments. And indeed, this has been done, and we
now have a compelling body of data suggesting that long-term potentiation
may indeed be the mechanism by which information is stored across a lifetime.
Well, this is not a lifetime, but for Rodin, it's still a very long period of
time within his lifespan. Notice, that following the application Of
o tetanic stimulation, there is a significant increase, in the amplitude of
the excitatory postsynaptic potential recorded in vivo, out for about a year's
time. So now we're beginning to gain confidence
that long term potentiation may be one means of storing information at the
synaptic level across a lifetime.