Welcome to this tutorial on the chemical
senses. The chemical senses pertain to a set of
special sensory systems associated with the head region of the body.
And we are going to discuss them in several parts.
In this part I'd like to give you an overview of the chemical senses.
And this discussion about chemical sensation is going to again, illustrate
for you the complexity of the brain as the body's most complex organ.
And as we get into our special sensory systems for the chemical senses , we'll
see once again evidence of genetically determined circuits that provide the
foundation for the functions of the nervous system.
And when it comes to discussion of these chemical sensory systems, I think we'll
see some, some really remarkable examples of where there is genetic expression.
In space and time that influences the structure of circuitry that provides for,
in this case, the foundation for chemical sensation.
So, I have just a brief tutorial for you. In this particular part, you will provide
an overview of the chemical senses. And my goal for you, is that you'd be
able to summarize the organization of the neural systems for the chemical senses.
So, let's get started. And just a simple comment that will set
the stage for our more detailed studies of olfaction gestation, in just a bit.
Our chemical senses are special sensory systems primarily in the face, but also
in the cavities within the head. And these are systems that detect minute
quantities of chemical molecules in the environment.
And these chemicals can serve a variety of purposes.
And that's what I want to help you understand in this brief overview.
So, consider, for example first, airborne molecules.
So, the air is full of odorants full of molecules that have a particular shape
and structure to them, particular chemical qualities.
And there are specializations of receptors in the face and in the head
that interact with these airborne molecules.
Specifically, these airborne molecules interact with receptors that produce a
sense of smell. And this is what we call olfactions.
So olfactory sensations, are a response to the presence of these airborne
molecules. Now some of these molecules, can actually
produce irritation to tissues in the body.
They are potentially damaging. And it makes great sense that we would
have a chemical sensory system that would be dedicated to detect these potentially
irritant molecules. And that's where the third major chemical
sensory system comes in. It's called the trigeminal chemosensory
system. Now in addition to airborne molecules, of
course there are molecules that are mostly water soluble, and also lipid
soluble that we ingest. So we put these molecules into our
bodies, obviously through our mouth, and these molecules have an opportunity then
to interact with the mucosa that is present in our oral pharynx.
So as we interact with these ingested molecules these molecules can then
activate a variety of receptors that give rise to our sensation of taste.
This is what we call gustation. So ingested molecules give rise to
gustatory sensations. Now, you may be wondering about flavor.
Which, as we'll talk about as we move along here, is actually a combination,
of, really all three of these chemo sensory pathways, when we think about it.
Consider for example eating your favorite spicy food.
There's a particular smell that might first arouse our appetite when this plate
of food is presented to us. And then of course, as we begin to eat
it, there is the consumption of these molecules that we begin to ingest and
then begin to interact with our gustatory receptors.
But, if it's spicy, there my also be a mild irritant quality to it that can
drive sensations through our trigeminal chemosensory system.
And somewhere in the brain, and I'll tell you where we think it actually happens in
just a little while. These various sensory systems are
combined. And they are combined in a sense that
gives us our quality that we call flavor. Well, in addition to feeding behaviors
these chemical sensory systems provide really a number of important functions.
beginning with nutrition. So, these chemical sensory systems allow
us to assess the palatability, or the desirability of those foods and drinks
that we consume. and this is quite important as I think we
all can appreciate perhaps not so much in our, our modern societies, but certainly,
as we sample the foods of the world, wherever we may be, we are always on
guard, are we not, for the palatability of food.
trying to avoid potentially harmful substances.
There are a variety of physiological functions that are regulated by our chemo
sensory systems. these include memory, visceral motor
behavior, reproductive cycles. And very importantly infant paternal
behaviors and infant maternal behaviors. There are a variety of social
interactions that are mediated via the chemical senses.
Through the chemical senses we evaluate self and we evaluate others.
As I mentioned already, safety becomes an important domain of chemical sensation.
Not just for the ingestion of potentially harmful substances, but also our
interaction with volatile chemicals in the environment.
That might be mildly irritating at low concentrations, and potentially quite
harmful at higher concentrations. And then lastly, it's through the
chemical senses that so much of our hedonic rewards system is tuned.
And what I mean by this is, those chemical messages.
That either we ingest, or that we sniff, or that we otherwise interact with, with
our chemo sensory systems. That can drive a sense of pleasure.
And one can imagine lots of examples of this, an attractive perfume the scent of
your favorite flower pleasurable foods and drinks.
And quite interestingly, also the possibility of there being, pheromones.
Now, as I'll describe as we get a little deeper into olfaction we know that, the
old world primates, including humans, lack the specializations, in the
olfactory epithelium, and in the peripheral parts of the olfactory system.
To be sensitive to pheromones in the way that non old world primates and other
non-primate mammals may be. but nevertheless there is some
tantalizing bit of evidence to suggest that our behaviors are in fact influenced
by chemical messages in a way that would be consistent with pheromone interaction.
So, that will be an interesting discussion to bang around perhaps on the
discussion forum or elsewhere. Well, I hope you've enjoyed this brief
overview of where we're going to go over the next couple of pieces to this
tutorial on the chemical senses. And I look forward picking up with you,
in just a moment, in a discussion of the olfactory system.
So, I'll see you then. [BLANK_AUDIO]