Welcome to Duke University. [MUSIC] Welcome to the Duke University School
of Medicine and welcome to Medical Neuroscience. Well, I hope you enjoyed
that tour of campus, starting at some of our athletic
facilities which are part of our better known brand at Duke University,
the Duke athletics program. And then working our way towards the
Medical Center, which has its own global reputation for excellence in the domain
of biomedical research and healthcare. Well, I hope to show
you much of our campus during the course of Medical Neuroscience. We'll spend some time together in
our teaching laboratories here at the Trent Semans Center, where we'll have an opportunity to
examine brain specimens together. We'll even spend some time behind
the scenes here in the Trent Semans Center in our specimen preparation room, where I will show you some of my
favorite places in the human brain. And of course, we're going to spend some
quality time in the Duke Institute for Brain Sciences through
that glass cube behind me. And of course, in the Duke Institute for Brain Sciences we always
think inside the box. That's the glass cube. And we certainly will spend some time here
in my office in the Duke institute for Brain Sciences. We'll spend some time together
here on the deck behind my house as you''ll get to see some of what
I get to see on a daily basis, as we learn together medical neuroscience. You'll even get to spend some time with
me in my gazebo back behind my house. The reason why I'm bringing you
into some of these unusual places, including some spaces around my own home,
is that I want you to understand that learning about
the brain is transformative. It could be part of your daily life,
part of your daily rhythm, and something that you can consider as
you face the various challenges and pursuits of your daily world, whatever
that may be, wherever that may be. But for now, I simply want to say once
again, welcome to Medical Neuroscience. I'm so glad that you found this course. I'm so
glad that you were sufficiently interested in the fascinating world of the brain
sciences to want to enroll in this course. What I'd like to do for the next few minutes is begin
to tell you a bit about myself. And that will lead to some additional
introductory video lessons that will help orient you so that you can get off to a
great start here in medical neuroscience. So let's begin by talking
a little bit about myself. I found over the years that it always
seems to help my learners, and it certainly helps me as an instructor,
if I help explain to all of you a little bit of my own story as to
how I got to be where I am today. Well, my story has a beginning,
as all stories do. But in my case,
it was back sometime in the last century. I won't tell you exactly when,
but I was born and raised in the northeast corner of
the United States in a small state, indeed the smallest state in
the United States, called Rhode Island. It's a beautiful place, it's part of the region of
the country that we call New England. And in my case, Rhode Island is really
dominated by a beautiful rocky, coastal landscape, with the occasional
sandy beach there as well too. But the ocean is near and
dear to my heart, as are the cold and wet and damp winters of my youth
in that part of the world. Well, it's a wonderful place
to be born and raised, and I return there often to visit family and
friends and some of my favorite places that I will share with you
actually as the course progresses. I moved out of that part of the country,
however, towards the middle of the United States
to a city called Tulsa, Oklahoma, where I did my baccalaureate education at a
university called Oral Roberts University. There I majored in biology, and I decided to stay on after graduating with
a bachelor of science degree to pursue a master of biomedical science degree,
emphasizing physiology. And it was at that point in my educational career that I was
introduced to the human brain. In fact, the year was 1986, and
I first met the woman that I would marry, the same year that I held a human
brain for the first time. So that was several decades ago now,
and in both cases, that of my wife, and that of the human
brain, it was pure love at first sight. So after completing a master's
degree in physiology, I was determined then to pursue a doctoral
degree in the field of neuroscience. And at the time, one of the very
best programs available was at Washington University, still in
the Midwestern part of the United States, in the city of St. Louis, Missouri, where
I pursued a PhD degree in neurobiology. Well, I received that degree in 1992, having the benefit of working very
closely with professor Joseph L Price, one of the truly great
neuroanatomists of our time. Dr. Price instilled in me a love for
human neuroanatomy, a broad interest in all kinds of
neural systems that are involved in the integrated action
of the nervous system. And he was a powerful mentor for
me personally as an educator. So, I owe a lot of the career that I've
enjoyed these last many years to my grounding with Dr.
Price at Washington University. Well from there, I finally came to Duke. And I came to Duke in 1992 as a
post-doctoral fellow with my wife, who was pursuing additional medical fellowship
at Duke University Medical Center. And I landed in the Department of
Neurobiology as a post-doctoral fellow working under the direction,
first, of Professor Dale Pervis, and then under the direction of
Professor David Fitzpatrick. After several years of fellowship work, I joined the faculty at
the Duke University School of Medicine. And I've enjoyed quite a long and
I think successful and certainly satisfying career as
a research scientist and as an educator. More recently, I have joined
a institute that we have at Duke, called the Duke Institute for Brain Sciences, where I'm involved
in leading the educational mission. So that's the broad
overview of how I got here. Now I want to be a little
bit more particular and tell you next about my life in research. So I've had a variety of interests, and I pursued a number of different
domains of neuroscience research. What they all have in common is a pursuit of understanding the organization and
function of neural circuits in the brain. And this pursuit has taken
many forms over the years. Much of my career has been focused on
the mechanisms of response selectivity in the visual areas of the brain. Now, I am truly fascinated by vision, but I see this line of investigation as
revealing some fundamental principles that will apply to other kinds of
circuits elsewhere in the brain, including those that serve
functions other than vision. So my interests are primarily basic,
at the level of understanding how the structure of neural circuits accounts
for their physiology, their function. Well, this interest in the visual
parts of the brain began to extend back in developmental time, and
more recently, evolutionary time. So I'm interested in understanding how
these kinds of neural circuits and their structure function
relations develop. And you'll hear more about the research
that I've been privileged to lead as we get deeper into
medical neuroscience. In brief, one area of my activity
has been to try to understand how what we call nature, and nurture, and
self organization, interact to account for the evolved state of mature neural
circuits that we have in our brain. Because of my work primarily back as
a graduate student with Professor Price, I've acquired some expertise
in human neuroanatomy, which has allowed me to interact with
clinical colleagues doing a variety of research on patients at
the Duke University Medical Center. And volunteer subjects who
are participating with us in ongoing investigations of
the structure, organization, and function of the human brain. So it's been a real privilege to be
involved in a variety of collaborative research projects with faculty here at
Duke, and colleagues around the world. As an educator, I've had wonderful
opportunities to develop and to have an impact here
locally at our Duke campus. As I mentioned, I am a member of the
faculty of the Duke University School of Medicine, and
in that role I've had the privilege of teaching students that are enrolled in
our Doctor of Physical Therapy Program. I've also been involved with educating our future physicians in our
Doctor of Medicine Program. And I've been involved with other kinds
of learners in our School of Medicine at various levels, as well, over the years. I've also been quite involved in recent
years in our Trinity College of Arts & Sciences, which is one of the main
baccalaureate colleges of Duke University. There I've been involved
with teaching courses in our Undergraduate Neuroscience Program,
and I've also helped to lead that
program as an administrator. I also teach in the graduate
school of Trinity College, and this has allowed me the opportunity
to contribute to the development of future brain scientists in their
doctoral phase of their education. And as a member of the Duke Institute for
Brain Sciences, I've been charged with helping to organize
and coordinate our educational efforts, primarily as they are directed towards our
baccalaureate students in Trinity College. So it's been a wonderful privilege to work
across this educational continuum and hopefully have an impact on learners,
not unlike yourself, who come to our residential
programs here at Duke University. Well, my story would not be complete if I
didn't also introduce you to my family. So here in a recent picture taken
at one of my favorite places, one of those rocky coastlines in the New
England region of the United States, you can see my wife and my two children. My wife is a geriatrician, meaning
she's an internal medicine physician who specializes in the care of older
adults, particularly those older adults near the end of their life that
are dealing with dementia and other kinds of medical and
neurological impairments. I have two wonderful children
named Jonathan and Hannah, who are a joy and
a blessing in my life on a daily basis. Well, now that you know something
about me, we'll next turn our attention to understanding
the scope of medical neuroscience.