[SOUND] Hello.
Welcome to this tutorial on synaptic transmission.
Our core concept is, once again, that neurons communicate using both electrical
and chemical signals. Now that we've discussed the means for
generating electrical signals, we're ready to talk about how chemical signals
are used in neuro transmission. We have a couple of learning objectives
for you today. first I want you to be able to compare,
contrast the structural functional similarities and differences between
electrical and chemical synapses. I want you to be able to describe, the
sequence of events that's responsible for transmission of neural impulses from one
neuron to the next, via a chemical synapse.
I want you to consider that process in more depth, and characterize the critical
role of calcium in chemical neurotransmission.
And lastly, I want you to be able to discuss the mechanisms of action, by
which Botox, which is a compound found in nature, and now produced for various
clinical and cosmetic procedures, how this compound affects neurotransmission.
[SOUND] Let's begin by considering the general structure and function of
electrical and chemical synapses. Electrical synapses which are illustrated
on the left hand side, function by means of proteins that form channels, called
Gap junctions. And these channels, allow for the passage
of small ions that carry current directly from the cytoplasm of one neuron to
another. Now in contrast, the way chemical
synapses work, is via the release of these packages of neurotransmitter into
the synaptic cleft. These packages are called synaptic
vesicles, and the transmitter itself could be one of a variety of chemical
compounds, that has to diffuse across the gap, between neurons in order to have an
effect, on the post synaptic neuron. Now in order to compare and contrast, the
general function and structure of electrical and chemical synapses, I would
invite you to turn to the very end of the tutorial notes that I've given you, and
look at the table, where I've try to lay out some general properties that allow us
to compare and contrast, electrical and chemical synapses.
So, let's begin with some general functional considerations.
Electrical synapses allow for, a very rapid communication of electrical
signals, from one cell to the next. And this is often very useful.
if. it's important to synchronize a local
population of cells, that might be in contact with one another via these gap
junctions. So here's a slightly more detailed
rendering of what a gap junction might look like.
So what we see here are, the close apposition of two membranes.
so much so that it allows for the pairs of complimentary gap junction proteins,
to actually line up in registeration with one another, from across the two cells
that are coming together here. So these proteins that form these gap
junctions, are called connexons. And they aggregate, to provide an aqueous
channel that allows for a current carrying molecule to pass directly from
the cytoplasm of one neuron to another neuron.
So here's another look at what this might, might look like.
So, you can see a variety of connexons that are all, arrayed.
Here allowing for ions to pass from one location to another, and with it
potentially carrying let's say a positive charge thereby exciting one cell and it's
neighbor. Now, as I mentioned, this mediates very
rapid synaptic affects so rapid that this is the fastest way that neurons have to
communicate one with another. Here in this illustration we see that
virtually the same instance that a presynaptic neuron fires an action
potential the postsynaptic neuron begins to depolarize towards thresholds, so that
it fires an action potential just a fraction of a millisecond after the first
action potential in the presynaptic neuron.
Now, this can be very useful in a variety of physiological contexts.
One is when it's important to synchronize a local population of cells.
So look here, we have two neurons that are connected via gap junctions.
And when one fires an action potential, not perfectly in sync but very nearly in
sync, there are other cells that fire action potentials.
So this is important in, certain parts of the central nervous system, such as the
hypothalamus. Where a certain quantity of a chemical
might be, released into the bloodstream. And in order to get enough of that
chemical into the bloodstream, to have the physiological effect, there needs to
be synchronization of a whole population of neurons.
So that they release their hormone, or they're releasing hormone, virtually at
the same moment in time. Now if we back up for just a moment,
let's look again at the structure here, of the typical electrical synapse.
And I want you to notice that, what's not present.
So a few things that are not present: We do not have any vesicles within a
presynaptic terminal containing a chemical neurotransmitter.
likewise, we do not have a significant synaptic cleft, that is, a gap between
the presynaptic neuron and the postsynaptic neuron that must be bridged
through some chemical mediator. Rather, we have two membranes that are
coming right close together so that the connexon proteins in either membrane can
associate with one another forming the gap junction.
Now these kinds of electrical synapses can form as two membranes come together,
they can form from one dendrite to another from a dendrite to a soma or a
cell body, or between two cell bodies, two somatas.
Now, one other point about the permeant species that can travel from one cell to
another through a gap junction. they're often a current carrying
molecule, such as an ion. but there might also be some other small
molecule, that's important in second messenger, signalling inside cells, or
otherwise important for intercellular communication.
small molecules that typically pass through these gap junctions can include
calcium ions, they can include ATP, adenosine triphosphate.
both of these molecules are important in mediating either tasks that require
energy, or the second messenger system, such as a calcium mediated system.
That can coordinate the activities between two neurons that are so
connected. Now notice also even though the arrows
here in this figure are illustrated just going in one direction, that the signals
may be bi-directional. That is, ions are free to diffuse down
the concentration gradients, or what other permeable molecule we have in mind,
such as calcium or ATP. so there's no directionality to the
communication here. It can go in both directions.
Now, one other point here. The probability of transmission is, is
very high. That is, when the gap junctions are open,
when the connexons form their channels. Molecules are simply free to diffuse down
their concentration gradients, meaning that an electrical signal generated in
one cell, will be transmitted to the neighboring cell via the passage of a
charge carrying ion with almost 100% certainty.
Okay. Now we're ready to consider some general
properties, both structural and functional of the typical chemical
synapse. And so if we look again at figure 5.1
from your book, we see on the right hand side an illustration of a typical
chemical synapse. And here, a few obvious morphological
features stand out. First of all, there are synaptic
vesicles. that contained chemical substances, that
are the neurotransmitters, that will be released as those vessicles fuse with the
pre-synaptic terminal. There's a distinct cleft, between the pre
and the post synaptic element. And that cleft is an extra cellular space
through which the neurotransmitter must diffuse.
Now the chemical synapse, this is the principal type of synapse we find in the
adult nervous system. I should have made this point earlier,
electrical synapses are much more common, throughout the nervous system, as the
nervous system is first being constructed in embryogenesis.
But with the exception of a few special populations such as in the hypothalamus
where we have those hormone secreting cells, and perhaps among some inhibitory
cell networks in the cerebral cortex, electrical synapses are not terribly
abundant. the principal transfer of information
that happens throughout the central nervous system is mediated via chemical
synapses. So those are the synapses that we're
going to spend the most time over the next couple of tutorials, thinking about
their, their function. So, as I mentioned there is a distinct
synaptic cleft, so it's not posible then to have, connexin proteins, forming gap
junctions or aqeuos pores through which ions can pass directly from one cell to
the next. Rather, there's a cleft.
So, there's a gap that must be mediated with some chemical message that diffuses
across that synaptic cleft. Now in addition to the presence of
neurotransmitters of course, we also have receptors for those neurotransmitters,
that are found in the post-synaptic membrane.
Another distinctive feature of the chemical synapse.
chemical synapses typically are from an axon to a dendrite, or more specifically
to a small protuberance called a dendritic spine.
But chemical synapses can be from an axon terminal directly to a cell body.
They can even be from one axon terminal to another.
So quite a lot of morphological variations can be seen with chemical
synapses as well as with electrical synapses.
Now notice that, current does not flow directly from one cell to the next with a
chemical synapse. There's this mediator, this
neurotransmitter. So once a chemical neurotransmitter has
bound to its receptor, something has to happen for there to be the generation of
current flow and another action potential in that post synaptic cell.
So we're going to take some time to think through exactly how that happens, over
the next couple of tutorials. Now with respect to timing, all synapse
are fast, but clearly the electrical synapse is designed for the most rapid,
most efficient form of transmission. So there's virtually no synaptic delay
when it comes to an electrical synapse. But for a chemical synapse, all of these
processes that we see outlined here to the right of this figure they all take
some time to unfold. So relative to the electrical synapse,
the chemical synapse is about maybe four or five times slower.
still fast, still maybe about a half millisecond delay at each synaptic
junction but still not nearly as fast as the electrical synapse.
So chemical synapses are going to be less effective, at synchronizing local
populations of neurons than the electrical synapse.
A few other points to make. the chemical synapse is unidirectional.
That is there's release of transmitter, from the presynaptic terminal and it
binds to receptors on the postsynaptic terminal.
Now for the aficionados, you'll recognize that there are presynaptic receptors for
transmitters. And there might be retrograde signals
given off by the postsynaptic cell. But for the most part, information flow
is from presynaptic terminal to postsynaptic terminal.
Unlike the bidirectional transmission that can clearly happen at the electrical
synapse. And lastly, before we leave our table.
it's worth noting that the probability of transmission at the chemical synapse, is
surprisingly low. for synapses in the brain typically, the
probability of there being a postsynaptic spike, given a presynaptic spike is on
average somewhere on the order of five to 10%, of course, it varies depending upon
the synaptic connection in question. But for the most parts, chemical synapses
in the brain, are very weak and they're very unreliable, and there's actually a
pretty good reason as to why that might be adaptive.
Which we'll talk about when we discuss synaptic plasticity.
Okay, at this point, I think we're ready for closer look, at the structure of a
typical chemical synapse. So, let's jump back to the first page of
your tutorial notes, and Roman numeral three, if you're following along, and
let's have a closer look at a chemical synapse.
Now, firgure 5.3 is from your textbook. And if you've got the textbook I would
highly commend this figure to you. I think it's a very useful figure, for
spending some time and studying, and maybe drawing out some of this out for
yourself. Because it will really help you
understand, some of the fascinating cell biology and the molecular biology that's
responsible for chemical synaptic transmission.
So, let's follow this figure. And we can, follow along in our notes,
which are designed to go right along with what we see in the figure.
So, let's consider the sequence of events that unfolds, as an action potential,
leads to the release of neurotransmitter in the generation of a post-synaptic
signal. This process begins in the steady state
and what we find there in the presynaptic terminal are a variety of organelles that
are involved in the production of energy. The production of the membrane that's
needed to package up neurotransmitters into vesicles, and then the machinery
itself. That manages the flow of vesicles and
ultimately their fusion with the presynaptic terminal.
So we find a variety of important proteins and structures that are present
within the synaptic terminal. And I'll show you that in more detail in
a few minutes. And we'll just highlight a few of the
important members of that cellular machinery as we go along.
Now I want you to notice what we have here in this presynaptic terminal, with
respect to our synaptic vesicles. So there are some vesicles that seem to
be floating freely in that presynaptic terminal.
And then there are others that seem to be attached to the presynaptic terminal
membrane. So there's a pool of vessicles that are
free, and there are a pool of vessicles that are attached.
Those that are attached, we call docked. And so these vessels that are docked, are
localized near what we call the active zone, which is going to be the site of
fusion of those vessicles with the plasma membrane.
Those dock vesicles are the ones that are docked and ready to go when an action
potential arrives. Okay, so sure enough, an action potential
does indeed arrive, at the presynaptic terminal.
So this is step number two now, and so a wave of depolarization passively diffuses
along this preterminal membrane, until we encounter a voltage gated calcium
channel. So near the active zones that are, are
numerous voltage gated calcium channels, that are present and as the wave of
depolorization hits, those channels open, and now calcium rushes in to the
presynaptic terminal. So, step number four here.
And this is because there is a steep concentration gradient with more calcium
outside, in the extracellular fluid, than inside that presynaptic terminal.
The influx of calcium is really key, because as calcium rushes in to that
presynaptic terminal. That is the key event that happens in
space and time. At the active zone.
And in time following the wave of depolarization that hits the active zone.
Calcium is what triggers the fusion event that leads to the fusion of the synaptic
vesicle with the presynaptic terminal. And the release of neurotransmitter.
Okay so, Calcium rushes into the cell and it causes these vesicles to begin to
fuse, with the presynaptic terminal membrane.
That allows their neurotransmiter to be released into the synaptic cleft via
excytosis, a very similar process happens with all other secretory cells in the
body. So, the axon terminal, is not
particularly unique in that regard, but it certainly is specialized to release
neurotransmitter via synaptic fusion events, very rapidly very efficiently.
Now, once the neurotransmitter, is released into the synaptic cleft.
Then that neurotransmitter, defuses. Where it can interact with a number of
post-synaptic receptors. Some of that neurotransmitter, of course,
is just free to diffuse away, which it does.
But the interaction of the nerve transmitter of the postsynaptic receptor,
is what triggers the transfer of the information from presynaptic terminal, to
postsynaptic process. If the neurotransmitter binds to a
receptor, that happens to open a cation selective channel, then catis can enter
that pre-synaptic terminal. That can lead to the depolarization of
that post-synaptic site. If this happens over many hundreds, or
potentially thousands of terminals on a cell.
Then that, very likely, will summate and lead to the depolarization, to threshold
of the postsynaptic neuron and an action potential might be generated.
without such massive summation, our typical synapse, in the brain is not
likely to de polarize the postsynaptic neuron to action potential generation.
But nevertheless, this is the general process: Transmitter binds to receptor;
receptor can open a cation-selective channel; cations can flow into the cell,
leading to their depolariazation. But that's not the only thing that can
happen. neurotransmitters can bind to channels
that can allow for negatively charged ions, anions, to flow into the cell, such
as a chloride ion. That might lead to the sub threshold
depolarization of the cell, or, or the hyperpolarization.
Depending upon, what the reversal potential is, of the ion channel in
question. There are also receptors that, mediate
channel closing events. So that can either lead to
depolarization, or hyperpolarization depending upon the permeability of that
particular channel. So, there's a lot of activities that can
occur when a neurotransmitter binds to its postsynaptic receptor.
We'll talk about them in more detail over the next couple of tutorials.
Alright. So what happens to the neurotransmitter?
After it's been released, well I mentioned neurotransmitter's free to
diffuse away. for some neurotransmitters at some kinds
of synapses, there may actually be an enzyme that degrades that transmitter.
In other, systems the glial cell, typically the astrocyte , which is going
to be present around synaptic junctions, can actually take up the
neurotransmitter. .
Or perhaps the metaboloid of that neurotransmitter, and begin a process
that will recycle that substance back to the presynaptic terminal.
And then finally, the last thing that typically happens, is that the membrane
from the synaptic vestical is retrieved ,and recycled.
So that the specialized proteins associated with that membrane can be
reused, and the membrane itself can be recaptured.
Obviously if a synapse, were to simply fuse with all of its vesicles over time,
the surface area of that synaptic terminal would continue to expand and,
that would not be consistent with the viability of that synaptic structure.
So it makes great sense that there's some kind of process that would recycle that
synaptic membrane. And indeed there is.