What we have in front of us is a
hemisphere that has been sectioned in the midsagittal plane.
And the purpose of this lesson is to focus on the spaces within the brain.
You'll recall that all of this beautiful brain formed from the walls of the tube,
and the lumen of that tube is still present in the adult form of the brain.
It's what we call the ventricular system. And it's in the ventricles that cerebral
spinal fluid is produced. And we want to observe those ventricles.
And follow the flow of cerebral spinal fluid from the ventricles to the space
outside of the brain. And then finally back into the
bloodstream. So let's begin by looking at the largest
of the ventricles, it's called the lateral ventricle.
And it's found just on the other side of this membrane.
So what I'd like to do is I'd like to gently dissect away that membrane so that
you can see the lateral ventricle. And I can do that by just cutting into
this space just underneath the corpus callosum.
And I'm going to cut a bit of a flap, so you can see that there really is a space
on the other side of this membrane. So now with that opening made in the
septum pellucidum you can see a large space within the anterior part of the fore
brain so this is called the lateral ventricle and it extends forward in to the
frontal lobe. It runs through the parietel lobe and even
expends back in to the occipital lobe. And then there is a branch of this space
that wraps around in to the temporal lobe on the lateral side of the brain.
So the lateral ventricle is by far the largest of these ventricular spaces in the
brain. Now, much of the cerebral spinal fluid is
produced in that lateral ventricle and it passes from the space within the
hemisphere to the third ventricle. Which is found right here along the
midline of the diencephalon, now in order for fluid to get from the lateral magical
into the third ventricle it has to pass through a narrow passageway called the
foramen of Monro, or the interventricular foramen.
And I'm going to pass this tube through that space to demonstrate that channel.
Here we go, so now you can see the tip of the tube that has passed through the frame
of Monro. And allows the communication of cerebral
spinal fluid from the lateral ventricle to the third ventricle.
Now notice that the lateral ventricles don't directly communicate one to the
other that septum pellucidum that I dissected away is a barrier that keeps the
fluid from one ventricle from getting to the next.
So here we have our third ventricle, which again is a narrow slit that is bounded on
either side by the hypothalamus and the thalamus above and cerebrospinal fluid
flows from this third ventricle down into the fourth ventricle through the smallest
of the channels that we have within our brains.
And that channel is a narrow space or a narrow aqueduct that runs through the
dorsal aspect of the midbrain. And this thin tube that I have is just
about the dimensions of that channel. And let's see if I can pass this tube
through that channel from the third ventricle down into the fourth ventricle.
And indeed we see this tube emerging now in the fourth ventricle.
In fact, the fourth ventricle allows for the escape of cerebral spinal fluid.
Cerebral spinal fluid exits the inferior limit of the fourth ventricle where there
is a space between the cerebellum and the medulla.
That space is called the foramen of magendie.
There is also another small aperture deep in the lateral recess of the fourth
ventricle, called the foramen of Luschka. So from that point, cerebral spinal fluid
exits the ventricular system and flows around the entire cerebral hemisphere in
the space underneath this tissue called the arachnoid.
So the tissue that's surrounding the hemisphere here normally contains about a
millimeter or two of cerebral spinal fluid that forms a important physical buffer
around the outside of the brain. Finally, this tissue allows for the
drainage of cerebral spinal fluid along the dorsal midline.
These rough features of the arachnoid right along the dorsal midline here, these
are called arachnoid granulations. And these are one-way valves that allows
cerebral spinal fluid to leave the ven-, to leave the subarachnoid space and drain
into the superior sagittal sinus, and then back into the venous blood.
Now before we conclude this lesson and while we have this brain in front of us, I
want to highlight one somewhat unusual feature of this particular specimen, and
it has to do with the cerebellum. Now, I want to show you the cerebellum
from what is likely a normal brain, in order to compare with this specimen that
we have in front of us. So, here we have a cerebellum from an
individual who died without neurological complication.
And I want you to notice how tight and full are these tiny little branches or
folia that form the cortex of the cerebellum.
In contrast, this other brain has an unusual amount of space between the folia
of the cerebellum. These spaces are indicative of one
particular pathology. That seems to result in the atrophy of
this interior and medial part of the cerebellum and that condition is chronic
alcohol abuse. So although I do not know these
individuals from whom these brains were obtained nor do I know their medical
history. The appearance of the cerebellum in this
specimen is highly indicative of chronic alcoholism compared to what we see in a
healthy looking cerebellum. And this alcohol abuse that I suspect
might have afflicted this particular brain is likely to have impaired the
coordination of gait and other aspects of locomotion of this individual in life.