Now, in the original experiments done by
Hubel and Wiesel and then many experiments done by many hundreds of
workers since then. we know that if such a micro electrode is
inserted into the cortex vertically, that is, in the radial axis of the cortical
microcircuit. What we find is a series of neurons that
we might encounter at different depths through the cerebral cortex that pretty
much all report the same aspects of the visual stimulus.
That is if we plotted their spacial receptive fields we all we find that all
of these spatial receptive fields more or less overlap, across the depth of this
recording. And when we look and test for the
orientation selectivity of these cells, we find that they are all pretty much
sharing the same orientation preference. In this example, again, all preferring
angles very much near 90 degrees. Now a different story would be observed
if the angle of the electrode penetration is made much steeper.
And that's what's shown in this experiment.
So now the micro electrode is coming in the cortex at a very sharp angle, such
that we are passing across a set of cortical micro columns progressing from
one to the next. And what we find when we move across the
cortex in this way, is that receptive field position slowly begins to drift
from one location through adjacent locations until finally we reach a
separation of a full receptive field after we advance a micro electrode about
a millimeter or so in the cortical tissue.
If we consider what happens with the advance of that micro electrode with
respect to the orientation selectivity of the neurons, we find a similar shift.
In one position, we may find neurons that prefer horizontal.
And as we progress across the cortex, moving, let's say, in hundred micron
increments, what we might see is a gradual progression of orientation
preference, as we move from one sight to the next.
And finally, we may discover that after movement of about half a millimeter or
so, that we might have a tuning function that is entirely non-overlapping with the
first neuron recorded, in this series across a penetration.
So this suggests that there is a columnar organization of circuitry where all the
neurons in the column tend to respond to the same stimulus, and that this columnar
circuitry is organized in some systematic fashion, such that neighboring locations
across the cortical surface are representing nearby aspects of the visual
stimulus. And there is a smooth progression of
change that occurs. Now, since the time that David Hubel and
Torsten Wiesel did their experiments that earned them the Nobel Prize additional
methods have been developed. Some of which allow neuroscientists to
look at large scale patterns of activity. Not at the single cell level, but at the
level of large populations of neurons over several millimeters of visual
cortex. One such method Is known as optical
imaging of intrinsic signals and it's based upon the fact as brain regions
become active, they draw oxygen off of the hemoglobin that's being supplied to
local regions. That creates a bit of oxygen debt, and as
a consequence arterials dilate and blood flow increases to those regions.
And there is exquisite coupling between brain activity and blood supply that
makes these signals a robust indicator of neural activity.
Now the method in question is called optical imagining, because we don't need
radioactivity as we would with PET imaging.
We don't need a magnet as we would with MRI imaging.
rather, using experimental animals and in patients undergoing neurosurgical
exposure of the brain, it's possible to directly illuminate the brain surface
with light and record the subtle changes in the absorbance of light that happens
as this oxygen and blood flow dynamic changes in brain tissue.
So what you're looking at here is the results of an experiment that I actually
performed. And in this study, we looked at the
responses of the visual cortex in an experimental animal where the cortex is
exposed to light and visual stimuli are presented on a screen in front of the
anesthetized animal. So this panel that we have here in the
upper right hand side of the image is a view of a the living brain and all the
little lines that you see, these are all blood vessels that are supplying the
brain with the blood that it needs to be active.
Now if we take an image of the brain with no stimulus on the screen and compare
that to an image taken while a stimulus is presented, we can subtract those
images and look for the very small change in the absorbance of light that is a
reflection of brain activity. When we do, we have the image that is
shown here on the left. So we're looking at roughly about 8
millimeters by 6 millimeters to the visual cortex.
And what we see are a series of dark spots and small bands.
And these dark spots and bands are cortical columns that were activated by
the stimulus. Now it's interesting to look at the
literature from the time of Hubel and Wiesel's original writings back in the
60s and 70s and see how even though they were probing the brain with
micro-electrodes, they still had a sense of the organization that this method
makes now quite clear. And that is that there are columns of
neurons that are responding to the same visual stimulus that are distributed
across the visual cortex. And columns shift their preferences
gradually from 1 location to the next. Such that, if we compared the responses,
let's say, to a horizontal stimulus, with those to, let's say, a vertical stimulus,
what we would find is that the columns that are present in these 2 images
precisely interdigitate. So the image we see here in the upper
right is the result of the subtraction of the images acquired while the animal
viewed horizontal stimuli and vertical stimuli.
And it's a way of looking at how selective is the response.
That is how well can we differentiate the responses to one visual angle horizontal,
from another vertical and we can repeat this method over and over again with
different kinds of stimuli different pairs of orthogonal stimuli and generate
a family of images that reflect the interdigitation of columns that are
representing orthogonal orientations. Now there's a different way to represent
this data that I'd like to show you here by looking now at a dynamic
representation of a set of these images where we will just loop around and see
how the illusion of motion in these images gives us some insight into the
organization of the functional map for orientation preference.
What I'd like to show you are some data from my lab and the lab of my colleagues.
Where we've looked at different experimental animals and have measured
the distribution of orientation columns in their brains.
And we've created an animation that runs through all the images that were required
as the orientation of the visual stimulus was changed.
So if I start this animation, and it will just run over and over.
What you can see, I think, is this beautiful dynamic array of functional
representation in the brain. Of course, it looks like something's
moving in the brain, nothing's moving in the brain.
What is changing is the distribution of functional activity over time as the
visual stimulus is rotated. And one point I would like for you to
appreciate is really how similar these patterns look in three very different
species of animals. the Treeshrew is a small animal that
makes its home in Southeast Asia. The Galago is a Prosimian primate from
Central and South America. And the third of course is a domesticated
carnivore. So we're looking at the visual cortical
patterns from animals that diverged about 65 million years ago.
And yet there are very similar patterns and seemingly a highly conserved cortical
network that's giving rise to these patterns.
And if we look in even more detail I find it interesting that we can localize
certain locations in these images where it looks like these dark domains of
activity are swirling around small points, or singularities.
And we call these points pinwheel centers.
And it appears as though the organization of this representation of orientation
preference is one of a large collection of pinwheel structures that are arrayed
across the visual cortex. Well one way that we can represent this
kind of a dynamic set of experimental data in a static fashion is to perform a
little bit of image math and then apply a color code which allows us to show what
we call the map of orientation preference.
So we're looking at the very same region of the visual cortex in an experimental
animal. And now we're using color to represent
the preferred orientation at each location in the visual cortex.
So for example, where we see the color red is representation of horizontal
visual stimuli. So these are all cortical columns or
bands of cortex that prefer horizontal among all possible orientations.
And where we see blue regions in the brain, or rather brain regions that have
been colorized blue, these are cortical columns that are representing near
vertical. And between red and blue are all possible
orientations that are represented in the brain.
Now, the dark bands that we see, these are structures that we can't resolve the
preference. But with newer techniques that allow us
to see the activities of individual neurons in the living brain, we know that
these zones are really not dark at all. Rather, they have cells that represent
orientation just as robustly with as sharp tuning functions as any other place
in the brain. But rather these cells with different
preferences come together in very tight spaces.
And with this method, we can't resolve their differences but with a cellularly
based method of resolution called two photon imaging of calcium signals, it's
possible to detect the preferences of neighboring neurons.
Well when we do so, what we discover is that there are locations such as right
here, right here, and there, for example, where there are point singularities,
around which a set of cortical columns are arrayed in a radially symmetrical
fashion. And at that point singularity, nearby
neurons have very different orientation preferences.
Such that we're looking at the center of one of these pinwheel formations.
Well, I can go on and on about this as my colleagues and I have in our research.
I won't belabor this point any further. But rather, I wanted to give you a bit of
an inside look at the circuitry and the physiology of this wonderful part of the
mammalian brain, the primary visual cortex.
And all of this really has just been to illustrate one computational property,
and that is the property of orientation preference.
Now we and others have done experiments where we've plotted out the activity
maps, not just of, let's say a horizontal bar moving along a particular axis of
motion. But let's say, a horizontal bar that's
either drifting in just one direction or drifting in the opposite direction.
And what we discover is that we may find a domain in the brain that represents a
horizontal stimulus but that domain may be subdivided.
And across half of its region, there may be cells that prefer upward motion of
that horizontal bar. And in the other half of that domain, we
may have a clustering of neurons that prefer downward motion of that horizontal
bar. This is what we call direction
selectivity. And as Hubel and Wiesel discovered, there
are numerous neurons throughout the visual pathways that respond best to
motion presented in just one direction with much weaker responses, if at all, in
the opposite direction. So, neurons in the visual cortex can be
characterized by their orientation and directional selectivity.