Okay then, well let's consider the
systems within the central nervous system that organize our visceral motor output.
So first speaking very broadly, and then we'll begin to look at each division in
terms of structure-function relations. So beginning up in the forebrain.
We will talk about higher brain centers that are principally in the ventral and
medial aspects of the forebrain, those parts of the brain that we associate with
the limbic system. Or, as you'll hear me talk later, I
prefer the term limbic forebrain, rather than limbic system, because there's
really not one system associated with this set of structures, but probably
multiple systems that have different kinds of functions.
Nevertheless, these structures form a limbus, or rim, around the corpus
callosum in the diencephalon, and extending into the medial parts of the
temporal lobe. Well, with respect to visceral motor
control, the relevant aspects of the limbic forebrain are the cingulate gyrus,
the orbital and medial division of the prefrontal cortex, and the amygdala.
So these structures are telencephalic. They integrate a tremendous amount of
information coming from just about every source that one can think of.
And the result of this integration is some sort of governance of the output of
our visceral motor system. Among other possible consequences of
integration in the limbic forebrain. Well one key structure that mediates the
effect of these telencephalic structures on our motor elements in the brain stem
of the spinal cord is the hypothalamus. And working closely with the
hypothalamus, are networks of neurons in the reticular formation of the brain
stem. So, these together we might call higher
brain centers interact with our lower motor neuronal pools, that ultimately
convey the signals out to the vector structures in the viscera.
And so, the connections, then, between the higher brain centers and the lower
motor neural pools become important. So there are, of course then, descending
projections, that connect structures like the amygdala.
The hypothalamus, the reticular formation with circuits of lower motor neurons,
more closely associated with the relevant cranial nerve nuclei and the neurons that
exit the spinal cord interact with our ganglionic neurons that govern
sympathetic and parasympathetic overflow via the spinal cord.
So, indeed, we're going to want to roughly localize these descending
projections, but primarily focus on the distribution of our preganglionic and
ganglionic neurons, when we talk about the visceral motor outflow.
So one point of emphasis in your study will be to understand.
How the organization of the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions differ not
only functionally but also anatomically. Well let's begin to look at that and
consider just very broadly the distribution of elements that convey the
outflow from the central nervous system to the viscera.
So this is a figure from the textbook that I know is small, and it may be hard
to appreciate in this view. but I'll try to highlight just a few
features here for you that might, might make it more obvious to you what the
points are that I want you to take from this.
And you'll probably find some versions of this information in various sources that
are more readily accessible to you. Well, lemme just state that, while we're
looking at the impact of visceral motor outflow on a variety of effector systems,
I, by no means, intend for you to learn or commit to memory each single action on
each of the end organs that are illustrated here.
what's more important to me is that you understand the basic functional
distinctions between the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions, and that you
know something about the organization from an anatomical perspective,
especially how preganglionic neurons connect to ganglionic neurons.
Okay, well let, let's step through this. And highlight a few salient features
here. So let's begin on the right side of this
figure. And on the right side we have a depiction
of the sympathetic division of the nervous system.
and what I want you to recognize is that to get from the spinal cord to the
viscera there is a two-neuron chain. The first neuron is distributed in the
thoracic levels of the spinal cord. And so we see these representations of
these neurons, here in a column of cells that we call the intermediolateral cell
column. This is where we find the neuron that
connects the central nervous system to the neuron that ultimately supplies the
viscera. So, because it's a two-neuron chain, this
neuron that we find in the thoracic spinal cord, we call a preganglionic
neuron. So this preganglionic neuron sends an
axon a short distance. Out through the ventral route to the
spinal chord. And it connects to a ganglion.
Now this term ganglion, as I think you now appreciate, is a word that we use to
describe a collection of cell bodies outside the central nervous system.
we'll talk. As we have already about the basal
ganglia as being really an exceptional use of this term ganglia.
so putting basal ganglia aside, the usual use of the term ganglia is to refer to
these collections of neurons that sit outside the central nerovus system.
Typically associated with a nerve. A nerve route, in this case, a chain of
ganglia that run alongside the spinal cord just outside the vertebral bodies.
So, we have this chain of elements that run alongside the spinal cord just
outside the vertebral body. And it is within these ganglia that we
have the cell bodies of the neurons that actually then go and project out to our
end organ. Okay.
So for example, let's look at the function of the sympathetic division with
respect to the heart. Well, what happens when there's
activation of these preganglionic neurons and the postganglionic elements is that
the beating of the heart accelerates, and the contraction, or the contractility, of
the left ventricle increases, thereby increasing the cardiac output.
So the sympathetic system is associated with supplying a greater volume of blood
to the body for those times when it is especially in need of extra energy in the
form of oxygen and glucose. We'll spend a little bit of time talking
about the governance of the bladder in the third part of this tutorial, so I
won't say anymore about that now. Okay, so here's the important take home
message that I want you to understand about the sympathetic division.
it is a two-neuron chain. So two neurons from CNS to the peripheral
organ, and the sympathetic division is preparing the body for action.
So it's involved in mobilizing the resources of, of the body.
And if one were to look across this entire set of effects that we see here on
the right side of this figure. We could understand how the body is
getting ready for action in various ways. Now lets have a, little bit of a closer
look at this relationship of preganglionic to postganglionic neuron,
in the sympathetic division of the visceral motor system.
So, here's a bit of a closer look, now, at the thoracic spinal cord.
And if we look in the thoracic spinal cord, I hope you'll recall that there's a
distinctive feature of the grey matter of the thoracic spinal cord, that we find on
the lateral aspect of that grey matter. In fact we call this feature the Lateral
horn, which is one way that, if you're looking at cross sections of the spinal
cord, you know you're in the thoracic region.
If you see that distinctive lateral horn. So, this lateral horn is present because
there is a column of neurons. And that column of neurons is called the
intermediolateral cell column, and we find it right here.
And these are the preganglionic neurons that send their axons out from the spinal
cord, to supply the ganglionic neurons, which in turn innervate the viscera.
So here's a look at this organization. So again we have the lateral horn of the
spinal cord, we have a cell body that grows an axon that exits through a
ventral root, and it's now entering the spinal nerve.
But it exits that spinal nerve to join the sympathetic trunk.
And we call this little branch here the white communicating ramus.
white because, these axons are, well myelinated.
And once these axons enter the sympathetic trunk they may make a
synapse, with a ganglion at the same level of that spinal nerve.
some of these axons will actually run some distance to reach more distant
ganglia. Some might run right through the
ganglion, in order to reach a more distant target.
there are some ganglia that are not right along the sides of the vertebral bodies,
but are set in a more interior location. At a somewhat greater distance, these are
called prevertebral ganglia. So, those tend to be more common in the
lower part of the viscera in the abdominal cavity.
Well, okay. So these preganglionic axons then
interact with a postganglionic neuron or a ganglionic neuron.
That we find here in one of these, collections of cell bodies.
And these ganglionic neurons then give rise to an axon that leaves the
sympathetic trunk, joins up again with the spinal nerve, and then goes out to
supply some visceral target. Now we call this little branch that
reconnects the ganglion to the spinal nerve, a gray communicating ramus,
because these axons, for the most part are unmyelinated or only very poorly
myelinated. So they don't have quite the same
glistening appearance as does the white communicating ramus.
Well, just a word about the neurochemistry here.
so, the transmitters of the ganglionic neurons and the preganglionic neurons
are, are quite rich. And, and quite diverse.
In fact, there are probably multiple neurotransmitters being released at these
synaptic connections. Nevertheless, there, there are some
dominant transmitters that you should know about.
The neurotransmitter of the preganglionic neuron, and, this was actually
highlighted in the previous slide here. So, the neurotransmitter of the
preganglionic neuron. That connects the lateral horn of the
thoracic core to the sympathetic truck, trunk, is the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine. Now the neurotransmitter of the
postganglionic neuron, that is the neuron that connects the ganglion itself to the
end target here. this neuron is releasing the
neurotransmitter norepinephrine. So, the modifier that we use to describe
that is noradrenergic. And, as we'll come to see, these
neurotransmitters interact with adrenergic receptors, the alpha and the
beta receptors for norepinephrine. Where as the acetylcholine neurons, they
interact with a variety of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors.
And all of these neurotransmitter receptors in our visceral motor system
are of the G protein coupled seven-transmembrane receptor family.
So as you will recall, these are the receptors that mediate a broad diversity
of post synaptic effects depending upon the second messenger systems that are
activated by those G proteins. So these effects tend to be a little bit
slower to develop than would be the case in our fast ionotropic receptors.
but as I mentioned, the diversity effects can, can be quite remarkable, and in some
cases quite long lasting.