Now, let's consider a couple of
properties of Long-Term Potentiation that help us to understand some of the
principles at play here. Once principal is called Specificity, and
the other is Associativity. Well, the principle of Specificity, means
that in order for a pathway to be potentiated, it must be active.
So, imagine again the scenario where we have two pathways.
One pathway is active and it's stimulated, and that synaptic connection
Is going to be strengthened with the application of that high-frequency burst
in activity. Meanwhile, another pathway, pathway two,
that was not active at the time that pathway one was active, its synapse is
not going to be strengthened. So, in order for there to be potentiation
of a pathway there must be activity. Activity at that synapse between the pre
and the post synaptic partner. Meanwhile, other parallel pathways that
are not active will not be strengthened. Okay, now we have the principle of a
specificity, and this is extremely important.
Now, image we've got two pathways converging upon the same postsynaptic
neuron. One pathway is already a strong pathway.
That pathway may then be stimulated and it can strengthen even more.
Now, the second pathway is weak, that is, it has only a very modest effect on the
postsynaptic neuron compared to the first pathway.
But if the second pathway, the weak one, is activated concurrently with a strong
pathway Then the weak pathway can be strengthened.
And this is the principle of associativity.
One reason why we think this is so exciting is that this principle of
long-term potentiation potentially provides a paradigm for understanding
associative learning. Where some reinforcing event, if paired
with an event of a neutral nature, can now acquire the significance of the
reinforcer. And when we think in those terms, we
recognize the basic paradigm of this experiment.
The pairing of a strong pathway with a weak pathway can lead to the potentiation
of both. Now, unfortunately, I need to digress for
just a moment. And clear up an unfortunate error in this
figure. this figure unfortunately has duplicated
the text from these two blocks. That should not have been in the right
hand side of this figure, this word not should be scratched off.
So, I'm going to do that digitally by just flying in a little patch.
So now we don't see that word not anymore.
So, in associativity, the pathways that has weak, but concurrent activity can be
strengthened along with the already strong pathway that we stimulated.
So, to summarize these principles; specificity means that only active
synapses are strengthened. And associativity means that co-active
synapses may be strengthened. Now, what I've been telling you about
long-term potentiation so far has been well studied in the hippocampus, and it's
also been well studied now in many different regions of the cerebral cortex
and even in subcortical structures. Well, the details may differ somewhat
from one type of gray matter to another. the basic principals of long term
potentiation seem to be well established and seem to be present in recognizable
forms and all kinds of different parts of the central nervous system when they were
discovered. Now many of these mechanisms of long-term
potentiation are dependent upon two important different types of glutamate
receptors. And so now let's turn our attention to
the mechanisms that support this long term potentiation.
and to do so let's focus on these tow particular glutamate receptors.
One called the AMPA receptor, or AMPA, and the other, then NMDA receptor.
These two different kinds of receptors, they're both ionotropic receptors for
glutamate, which means that The site for binding Glutamate is part of an ion
channel. And both of these ionotropic receptors
therefore can mediate rapid conductances in that postsynaptic cell.
Well let's look at how they both contribute to the induction and the
maintenance of long term potentiation. Now, let's consider first a synapse that
has not been stimulated with that high frequency train.
So, it's synapse is relatively weak, and it's impact on the postsynaptic cell is
fairly modest. So, if this synapse is firing at a fairly
low rate. We would expect the postsynaptic cell to
remain near it's resting membrane potential.
There maybe a small small depolarization that maybe recorded but we wouldn't
expect very much at all with low frequency stimulation.
So what's happening there is that the action potential and the presynaptic
neuron Would be sufficient to induce the release of Glutamate from the synaptic
vesicles that are present there. The Glutamate would bind to it's
receptors on the AMPA and NMDA receptor channels.
The binding of Glutamate to AMPA would open up the pore allowing sodium ions to
come in. But again with, low levels of activity we
wouldn't expect a whole lot of decolorization to happen at this
particular synaptic junction. Well, that would be a bit of problem for
our MDA receptors for as you will recall in the poor for the MDA receptor channel
there's a binding site for magnesium. Ions and that magnesium is going to
blocked the conductance of that channel. Even though glutamates bound and the poor
is in it's open configuration, the presence of magnesium is going to block
the influx of ions. Well that's what happens when the
postsynaptic cell. Is near resting membrane potentials.
However, should there be a strong depolarization of that postsynaptic cell,
which would be expected if there would be a high frequency train of activity at
this synapse, then what we would find is a flood of postsynaptic glutamate.
Out of that presynaptic terminal, and perhaps out of surrounding synapses from
the same input, that might reach this postsynaptic dendrite.
And that might lead to much more significant depolarization in this
postsynaptic site. Well, as that happens sodium is coming
into the AMPA receptors perhaps a wave of depolarization is passively propagating
along the dendrite impacting the spine. There may be sufficient depolarization to
expel magnesium from the pore of the NMDA receptor channel.
Now, as you know magnesium is a divalent cation, so if the inside of the cell
becomes positive, then, then magnesium is going to be repelled out of that channel
pore. That will allow that channel now to be
available for The influx of sodium ions and calcium ions.
As well as the efflux of potassium ions. If you remember what we learned, a few
tutorials ago about the NMDA receptor channel.
You'll know that it's cation selective. But not particularly selective for with
cations that flow. So all three of those cat irons are going
to be involved the one that I would highlight however is calcium.
So, calcium, very important molecule for reasons that will be clear in just a
moment enters through the MDA receptor channel.
And with a significant depolarization then we would expect there to be a rapid
elevation of postsynaptic calcium levels to a significant degree in this
stimulated synaptic junction. That's important, because the rapid
elevation of postsynaptic calcium leads to the induction of long term
potentiation. Well, let's look at what we know about
how that might occur. So, again we're looking at a synapse that
has been subject to a strong depolarization perhaps via that
high-frequency stimulation that may have been applied in an experiment, or some
other means of depolarizing this postsynaptic spine.
And under those conditions, what we'll see is a rise in intracellular calcium.
And that rise will be sudden, it will be significant, and that intracellular
calcium then becomes the key trigger Of second messenger systems that result in
the induction and the maintenance of long-term potentiation.
So intracellular calcium can interact with second messenger systems such as the
protein kinase C system or the calcium calmodulin kinase II system.
Both of which will phosphorylate target proteins and among the targets are the
mechanism that are involved with the trafficking of AMPA receptors from pools
that are associated with vesicles within the postsynaptic spine to the terminal
membrane. So as a consequence of this rapid
increase in postsynaptic calcium, now AMPA receptors can be inserted in the
postsynaptic membrane. And the more AMPA receptors we have in
the postsynaptic membrane, the stronger is the response of that postsynaptic
neuron to synaptic glutamate. This is a molecular picture of what
long-term potentiation actually means at a postsynaptic spine.
Well, one consequence of long-term potentiation, especially in the
developing brain, is the awakening of silent synapses.
Well, what is a silent synapse? A silent synapse is a synapse that is
morphologically present and it might be capable of function except that it would
lack AMPA recepters. And so here's evidence for one such
silent synapse. Imagine stimulating an input to.
A postsynaptic cell, while that cell is near its resting membrane potential.
And there may not be any measurable post-synaptic potential recorded.
So one might imagine that, well, maybe the site of stimulation doesn't connect
to that cell. However, if the cell is depolarized with
a voltage clamp, one might then record a significant excitatory postsynaptic
current. And that is evidence that indeed there is
a synaptic connection there. The required depolarization of that
postsynaptic neuron implicates a synapse that is populated by MDA receptors and no
AMPA receptors. So, what we might find and indeed
frequently we do find, especially in the developing brain, are the silent synapses
where we have NMDA receptors present only with insufficient numbers of AMPA
receptors to make this functional. with low frequency stimulation.
However, with the presence of stimuli that can induce long term pretentiation,
and these kinds of stimulation events can accrue during the course of development.
We see the insertion of AMPA receptors to accompany the NMDA receptors.
And so now, a silent synapse has been awakened into a functional synapse, which
involves both the presence of NMDA receptors, and now a compliment of AMPA
receptors sufficient to mediate the effect of synaptic glutamate.
even without significant depolarization of the postsynaptic process.
Here's another picture of what this might look like.
Before long term potentiation, stimulation of an import might lead to
very little postsynaptic current. But after long-term potentiation, the
same stimulus might lead to a significant inward current recorded at that synaptic
junction. And this suggests that there has been the
insertion of new AMPA receptors, possibly even the generation of a new synaptic
connection between the presynaptic and postsynaptic dendrite.
One can record from circuits in which there's a significant increase in the
response of the postsynaptic neuron to glutamate, again indicative of
plasticity. Either the awakening of silent synapses,
or in some cases the construction of new dendritic spines in response the growth
of new synaptic connections. Well, for that to happen, there needs to
be a mechanism by which synaptic plasticity over the short run, can
influence long-term change, and that requires not just the activation of
second-messenger systems that are already present within the postsynaptic spine,
but the activation of systems that can trigger a change in gene expression, and
that's possible following long-term potentiation.
So in the early phase of long-term potentiation, we may see a
calcium-dependent increase in the number of AMPA receptors that are inserted, as
we've been discussing. But one might also see the growth of new
synaptic spines, new synaptic connections.
Between presynaptic elements and postsynaptic dendrites.
And this requires the activation of transcriptional regulators.
And in this cartoon, we see evidence of a protein kinase pathway activating cyclic
AMP and protein kinase A and biding to CREB.
Which then can regulate the expression of genes that encode for the proteins that
are necessary to build new postsynaptic spines to established new synaptic
connections. In this way synapses can be added
following a stimulus that is sufficient to induce long term potentiation.
Now, I would, encourage you to review the roles of ampere receptors and glutamate
receptors, and long term potentiation by viewing animation 8.2, you can click on
the hyperlink in your. Digital copy of the tutorial notes, or
you can browse for yourself to the website that supports the textbook that
we have been referring to. And I think you'll enjoy the short
animation that will help tie together many of these concepts for you.
I would also encourage you to consider the study questions.
Which is available at the end of your tutorial, and it's shown here.
What I want you to do is I want you to think about why MDA receptors are so
important for synaptic plasticity. And I'll give you a couple of
possibilities to think about. So, go ahead and answer this question,
and register your response accordingly.