Now, let's explore the medial surface of
the human brain, using a specimen that's been cut right down the mid-line in the
midsagittal plane. To reorient you to this view of the brain,
let's again identify the embryological divisions that are visible in this view of
the brain. Most of the cerebral cortex that we see,
as well as now the cut interior surface of the forebrain, is derived from the
prosencephalon. The cerebral cortex is Telencephalon and
then now, what we can see here is the Diencephalon, being comprised of a region
called the Thalamus and then just below the Hypothalamus.
Together, the Diencephalon and the Telencephalon are what have become of that
first interior bulge of that developing neural tube that we call the forebrain.
From about this location on back, this is what we call the hindbrain.
And that includes much of the brain stem and the cerebellum.
Between the hindbrain and the forebrain is a small division of the developing neural
tube that became a brain region called the middle brain, or the Mesencephalon.
And that's what we see right here. So, we have forebrain, middle brain, and
then the hindbrain. Which in this view, we can recognize as
the pons and cerebellum, together forming the metencephalon.
And then down below is the medulla oblongata, or the myelencephalon.
Now, let's look again at the forebrain and talk about the gyral structures that we
can see in this view of the Telencephalon. So, just on top of the Diecephalon is this
broad band of white matter called the Corpus Callosum, and that is a very
obvious visual feature that helps define the contour of this medial set of gyri
that sit above it. Right above the corpus callosum is a long
gyrus called the cingulate gyrus. And this gyrus has many divisions that we
could identify. But, we'll keep it simple and just call
this the cingulate gyrus. Just above the cingulate gyrus is a sulcus
called the cingulate sulcus. And then, superior to the cingulate sulcus
is the superior frontal gyrus, that forms the dorsal margin of the frontal lobe.
The superior frontal gyrus extends back towards this region around the medial
terminus of the central sulchus called the paracentral lobule.
The paracentral lobule is bounded below by the cingulate sulcus, and then posteriorly
by the marginal branch of the cingulate sulcus.
So, this then is the paracentral lobule around the termination of the central
sulcus. So, just posterior to that central solcus
then is the parietal lobe and just behind the marginal branch of the singula salcus
is the gyral structure called the Precuneus.
The Precuneus is the boundary of the parietal lobe and the occipital lobe.
Between those two lobes is a long, straight sulcus that runs from the
inferior surface of the hemisphere all the up to the dorsal mid-line.
This sulcus is called the Parieto-occipital sulcus, and it's the
posterior boundary of the precuneus. Now running in most brains, almost at a
right angle, to this parietal occipital sulcus is the calcarine sulcus.
And the calcarine sulcus is present right here.
The calcarine sulcus is an important landmark that identifies the location of
the visual parts of the brain, on the medial surface of the occipital lobe.
Down below, the oc, the calcarine sulcus is the lingual gyrus.
And above the lingual gyrus is the cuneus. The lingual gyrus forms something like a
tongue on the bottom of the occipital lobe.
And lingual means tongue. Just above that calcarin sulcus and behind
the parietal occipital sulcus is this wedge shape that we call the cuneus.
And cuneus is a word that means wedge. So, we have the tongue, the wedge above
the tongue, and then the gyral formation. Again, just in front of the wedge is
called the precuneus, or the structure in front of the wedge.
We'll come back and talk more about the structures that are visible here in the
brain stem in another lab lesson. But for now, again just to quickly review,
we have the forebrain, including the telencephalon and the diencephalon.
The midbrain, or the mesencephalon, and then below the middle brain is the rest of
the brain stem including the pons, the cerebellum, and the medulla oblongata.