Okay, so now that you know something
about the extraocular muscles and the innervation patterns, we're ready to talk
about eye movements. And as I mentioned, there are five basic
types of eye movements. And I'd like to just very briefly mention
them and then we'll consider each one in turn.
Okay, so broadly speaking, we make eye movements when the two eyes go in the
same direction. These are called conjugate eye movements,
and there are four kinds of conjugate eye movements.
There are saccades, which are these very quick, ballistic movements of our eyes.
again if I give you the challenge of finding a clock in your environment and
making an eye movement towards that clock, that's a saccade.
Its a very quick, ballistic kind of eye movement.
There are smooth pursuit eye movements. And these kinds of eye movements are what
we might, undergo if we wanted to, follow the flight of a bird, for example, across
the sky. It's slow, and it's typically guided by a
visual target. There is another category of eye
movements that we call optokinetic eye movements.
And these eye movements, sometimes involve a combination of smooth pursuit
and saccadic eye movements. they're visually guided.
And what they do is they are a response to large-scale movements in our visual
environment. There are some other very subtle kinds of
optokinetic eye movements, that don't necessarily combine smooth pursuit and
saccade. But what they all have in common is the
visual stimulus being large-scale visual movement.
The fourth type of conjugate eye movements, we've already discussed in
some detail. These would be the vestibulo-ocular
movements. And these are the kinds of eye movements
that are necessary to look straight ahead at you while I shake my head back and
forth. Okay, we won't talk too much about
vestibulo-ocular movements today, since we've already had a discussion about
that, but I want you to know where to go back to learn more about vestibulo-ocular
movements. Okay, so these are the four congugate eye
movements. There's also a category of eye movements
where the two eyes don't actually go together.
These are called disconjugate eye movements because the eyes move in
opposite directions. And this is the kind of vergence eye
movement that's necessary to focus on a distant object and then to a near object.
So, for example, I might ask you to hold your finger out in front of you and focus
on that finger tip, and then focus at a distant sight, more or less in the same
sight line but off at a distance. And then jump your fixation back and
forth. Well, I doubt you can see what my eyes
are doing, but I know what they are doing as I go to focus on a distance target.
The eyes rotate outward, and when I go to focus on the near target, my fingertip,
my eyes rotate inward. So, the eyes are moving in different
directions. In order to go from outward to inward,
the left globe needs to rotate in the adduction direction, towards the midline,
which would be a rotation to the right. The right eye has to also move in the
adduction direction, but for that eye it's a movement to the left.
So the two eyes are actually rotating in different directions, but to serve a
common functional goal. Okay, in this case, changing the line of
fixation from a distant target to a near target.
Okay, now let's talk about each of these five types of eye movements in turn.
And then we'll spend just a little bit of time on the circuitry that's important
for a couple of these eye movements. We'll begin with saccades.
So, a saccade is a quick, ballistic eye movement that allows us to change
fixation from one target to another. And in the graph here, we see an
illustration of a couple of key points regarding saccadic eye movements.
So imagine a visual target comes on in this position right here.
And what we noticed is that, it takes a bit of time for us to generate the
saccade. Typically about 200 milliseconds is
necessary between the onset of the target and the onset of the eye movement that
allows us to fixate that target. So, the eye movement itself is a rather
sudden sharp movement where we change fixation from one position to another,
and this allows us to acquire this target.
And this 200 millisecond delay turns out to be rather important, because let's say
in the middle of this 200 millisecond period of time, some other target came on
that we might choose to look at. what would happen is that we couldn't
generate a new saccade until the completion of the previous saccade.
So there would be another 200 millisecond delay before the acquisition of the next
saccade target. So there seems to be a very quick an
explosive execution of this type of eye movement that allows us to go from one
fixation point to the next. And this is what we do all the time.
When we're looking around at a visual scene what we do is that, we move our
eyes from one location to the next. I would encourage you to jump on Youtube
or some other video source, And just explore, what people have posted who
study eye movements. And there's all kinds of examples that I
could direct you to, where people have now begun to track eye movements.
And, it's, it's quite remarkable what people look at and how, often one
actually makes a change in fixation. For most of us, when we're just casually
walking down the street or observing a sporting event, whatever we may be doing,
we are changing our fixation about two to three times a second, which is really
pretty remarkable. and what's equally remarkable is the idea
that somehow, while we're moving our eyes all around these visual scenes at such a
quick rate, our brains are generating this constant, stable, visual
construction of what this scene actually is that we're inspecting.
We may be tracking motion within that scene, but there's a stable scene,
despite the ongoing saccadic movements our our eyes.
Now one feature of saccadic eye movements that I really do want you to demonstrate
for yourself, is that during this period of time when our eyes are actually
moving. Maybe about 150 milliseconds of motion
here in this particular example, and that's pretty typical for how long we're
moving our eyes during a typical change in fixation.
we are functionally blind during that time, at least with respect to our
conscious visual perception. So during this interval of time we don't
actually process the motion that is otherwise streaming into our subcortical
visual pathways. Now, at some level, we think that
information is present in the cerebral cortex, but it's not integrated within
our conscious perception of the visual scene.
So here's how you can can convince yourself of that.
I want you to go to a place where there's a mirror in front of you, and just pick
out some imaginary spots on that mirror. Not too far away from one another.
Let's say within oh, maybe about 20 centimeters or so of one another, and
just, just make fixations to one spot and then the other.
You'll have to imagine those spots, or maybe you can actually put a little mark
on the mirror, so that you have a visual target to saccade toward and look at.
And what I want you to try to do, is to see if you can watch your own eyes move
in that mirror. Well, if you're like me, if you're like
most people, the best you'll do is just catch a fleeting glimpse of your own eyes
move. And this is demonstration of the fact
that, all this visual blur that we might anticipate during the motion of our eyes,
is actually suppressed from visual consciousnesses.
And for this reason it's, it's really quite difficult to see your own eyes
move. Now, if you happen to be with someone,
and that person's watching your eyes move, there'll be no doubt in your
observer friend's mind that your eyes are actually darting about from one target to
the next. and yet when you try to appreciate that
yourself, it's really quite a challenge. So why don't you go ahead and pause this
tutorial, and go find a mirror and try that for yourself.
And when you come back, we'll move on and talk about the next kind of eye movement.