Now, I'd like to draw your attention to,
the illustration in panel A. So, here in panel A, we have a view of
the cerebellum, as if it were possible to remove the cortex from the cerebellum,
and flatten it out. If we were to do so, we would find a
convenient way to recognize three major functional subdivisions of the
cerebellum, that we want to discuss. Now, there are many different ways to
divide the cerebellum. One could take an anatomical approach,
I'm choosing to take for you, a functional approach.
And with this in mind, we would define a spinocerebellum.
The spinocerebellum, includes essentially a medial strip of cerebellar cortex that
spans what we call the two cerebellar hemispheres.
And includes the continuity of those hemispheres along the midline region here
which has a memorable name. This is called the vermis, which is Latin
for worm, it's as if we're looking down on a segmented worm.
Unlike the hemispheres of the cerebrum, there really is no separation of the grey
matter here between the, the cerebellar hemispheres rather, there is continuity.
So, this spinocerebellum, really is the central region along the midline and the
parasagittal regions of the cerebellar hemispheres.
And we call it the spinocerebellum because, this is the part of the
cerebellum that is mostly concerned with movements of the arms and the legs.
It is receiving input from the spinal cord.
Now, there's also some representation of cranial movement here, in the spinal
cerebellum so let's not, let that fact deter us from calling this the
spinocerebellum. The next component is this very large
cerebrocerebellum. And this is what comprises most of the
cerebellum, that we observe when we look at the human cerebellum.
We have these, very large, very extensive, lateral hemispheres of the
cerebellum. much larger than any non primate mammal
and perhaps even as large or larger than any other of the primates.
So, this is the part of the cerebellum that is involved with circuitry, from the
cerebral cortex that returns a signal back to circuitry of the cerebral cortex.
Hence its name, cerebrocerebellum. We'll say more about the functions of
this division of the cerebellum in the third part.
For now, suffice it to say that the cerebral cerebellum is concerned with the
skilled movements that we perform with our distal extremities, especially when
there's some kind of skill. That is being executed according to some
goal directed motor plan. And then the third component of the
cerebellum that I would mention pertains to this little, structure that is tucked
away under the ventral and anterior aspect of the posterior cerebellum.
This is called the vestibular cerebellum and this term vestibular cerebellum is a
functional term, anatomically it relates to these two parts of the cerebellum that
we call the flocculus. And the nodulus, and together we call
this the floccular-nodular lobe. So, the vestibular cerebellum is the
flocular nodular lobe, and this is the part of the cerebellum that is intimately
connected. With the vestibular nuclei of the dorsal
lateral tagmentum, in the upper medulla and the caudal pons.
So, this part of the cerebellum is going to have much to do with calibrating and
governing the motor output from our vestibular nuclei.
Let me just show you, a bit more closely these functional divisions, with special
attention now given to the organization. Of the representation of the body in
spinocerebellar as I mention just a moment ago.
The spinocerebellum refers to this central strip of cerebellar cortex that
includes the vermis right along the midsagittal plane.
And a paramedian strip extending out maybe a centimeter or so from that
vermis. [NOISE] And here we have a map of the
body, and this body map is not a single smooth continuous map, but it's
fractionated in a way. That's not unlike the mapping of motor
intention in the motor cortex is fractionated.
In fact, we have multiple representations that are present here and this is a very
simplified view and undoubtedly, an incorrect view with respect to many of
its details. But it conveys a sense of the
organization of the representation of movement in the spinocerebellum.
And what I would especially highlight is the fact that the axial, representation
is closer to the middle of the spinal cerebellum, along the region of the
vermis. Whereas, the, representation of the
distal extremities, extends outward from the vermis into this paramedian strip of
cerebellar cortex that begins to extend into the lateral hemispheres.
Now, as I mentioned there are two levels of processing with respect to the gray
matter of the cerebellum. There is the cortex and then there's the
deep nuclei. So, the cortex is what we see from the
outside when we look at these massive cerebellar hemispheres.
And this cortex is folded into these tight little mini convolutions.
Now, in the cerebrum we call these gyree and the spaces between them we call the
celsi and the cerebellum we call these folia.
Because if one were to look in cross section, at this cortex what one would
see is a, a nice delicate extension of processes almost like leaves on a tree.
So, folia implies leave, and what we see in the cortex of the cerebellum looks
more like leaves then it does a large massive gyrus.
now what I would also point out about this folia, is that they extend over,
over quite a considerable distance. One can follow the same fold across the
cerebellar hemisphere for at least several centimeters, perhaps even through
the spinocerebellum across the vermis and into the opposite cerebellar hemisphere.
So, when we talk about the circuitry in detail, we'll see what accounts for this
organization of these folia, that extends across the long axis of the brainstem in
this way. Now, below the cortex, there are the deep
nuclei, and the deep nuclei are the structures that are highlighted, here.
they actually reside in the white matter, just on top of the roof of the fourth
ventricle. There's a very large structure, that
resembles sort of a row of molar teeth. And because of its, resemblance to
dentition, this nucleus is called the dentate nucleus.
That's by far the largest of our deep cerebellar nuclei and its nucleus seems
to be mainly related to the cerebrocerebellum.
Right next to the dentate nucleus, are at least a pair of nuclei, sometimes more,
depending on how you subdivide. These are called the interposed nuclei.
And these nuclei pertain mainly to the lateral aspects of the spinal cerebellum.
And then, most medially, there is a small nucleus called the fastigial nucleus.
And this nucleus pertains mainly to the, to the vermis, or the medial region of
the spinal cerebellum. And it's found appropriately on the
medial side of this cluster of nuclei. Now, you may be wondering about a deep
nucleus for the vestibulocerebellum as I'll mention, the deep nuclei of the
vestibulocerebellum are actually the vestibular nuclei of the brainstem.
So, from this standpoint we can consider the vestibular nuclear complex.
As deep cerebellar nuclei, that are displaced out of the cerebellum and into
the brain stem. Well you'll understand the anatomical
relationships between cortex and deep nuclei as we get into part two of this
tutorial. At this point, I actually want to show
you a bit of histology. So, this is a transverse section through
the brainstem and our inset below hopefully orients you to what you're
looking at. We're seeing a cross-section through the
caudal part of the pons, that extends through the fourth ventricle and into the
cerebellum and what I want to highlight for you.
Is this beautiful dentate nucleus and hopefully you can imagine why the early
anatomists called it a dentate structure given the resemblance, at least in your
imagination perhaps, to a row of teeth. So that would be the dentate nucleus.
It looks like we have elements of our interposed nuclei here, then this is our
vestigal nucleus. So, these are the nuclei that are
arranged in the base of the cerebellum in the white matter on the dorsal and
lateral aspects of the fourth ventricle. Now I'll just caution you, if you look
carefully at this dentate nucleus you make think that you've seen something
like that before. If you've perused through sections of the
brain stem in the medulla. This dentate nucleus, visually resembles
the inferior olivary nucleus. We'll talk about the inferior olivary
nucleus in just a little while. So,[COUGH] so, I don't want to you
confuse the two, even though they look similar.
we know that this is the detente nucleus, because it is in the cerebellum.
Right? It's in the white matter at the base of
the cerebellum. It's dorsal and lateral to the fourth
ventricle. Whereas, the inferior olivary nucleus, is
in the anterior aspect of the brain stem, in the medulla which is a few centimeters
in the inferior direction to where this section has been taken.
Well, let me show you one other view of, the system, this is from a rather unique
section, prepared by, one of our histologists from a generation ago here
at Duke. This is a section taken parallel to the
long axis of the brain stem. And it happens to catch the base of the
cerebellum as it's connecting to the brain stem.
So, this is a myelin stain as was the previous image, so the white matter is
going to be dark and the gray matter is going to be light.
And what we see, is the cerebellum out in this region of the image.
So, we have a cerebellar cortex and white matter underneath and then now here's our
beautiful dentate nucleus. very rich, robust dentate nucleus as seen
in this section. And we'll come back to this, but I'll
just highlight for you this white matter that's streaming out of the dentate
nucleus. These are axons, that are going to be
forming the superior cerebellar peduncle and what these axons do is they stream
out of the dentate nucleus. They run through that peduncle into the
pons. They cross the midline, and then synapse
in targets in the thalamus and in the brainstem.
So, more on that when we talk about the outputs of the deep cerebellar nuclei.
Okay, we have concluded our introduction to the basic parts of the cerebellum.
When we come back we'll take a closer look at cerebellar circuits.