Okay, I think we're ready now to explore
the chemical senses. Beginning with the sense of olfaction.
As I've already told you, this aspect of our consideration of the chemical senses
will reveal again the complexity of the human brain.
And will provide us an opportunity to explore some really fabulous circuitry
that connects the sensory periphery in the olfactory system to the brain.
And I think you'll be surprised with some aspects of the specificity of that
relationship that reflects genetic instructions that are played out.
Both in, in brain space and in time, as the nervous system develops.
An all of this, is critical for the foundation of the olfactory sense.
So my learning objectives, for you, in this session, in this part of our
tutorial, are really three-fold. I'd like for you to be able to
characterize the peripheral and central organization.
Of the olfactory system. I'd like for you to again focus on this
critical issue of sensory transduction that's been central to all of our
considerations of sensation so far in the course.
And I'd like for you to get a feel for how information is actually encoded.
In the olfactory system. I think one of the values in studying the
chemical senses is that we discover perhaps some surprising means for coding
information in the sensory system that especially an olfaction seem to be quite
different than the kinds of coding mechanisms that we've seen so far.
In somatic sensation, in vision, and even in audition.
Alright, well let's begin with an anatomical overview of the olfactory
system. So, as I've already mentioned to you,
olfaction begins with airborne molecules interacting with receptors.
And those receptors are found in our olfactory epithelium.
And our olfactory epithelium is found in the dorsal and medial aspect of our nasal
passageway and it's there that we find our receptor cells.
We'll have a closer look at those receptor cells in just a little bit, but
for now, I just want to place them for you.
So our olfactory epithelium then is where sensory transduction occurs.
So our sensory cells then, are found within our olfactory epithelium, which is
shown at a little bit higher magnification here to the right.
And these cells grow an axon. That passes through perforations in the
ethmoid bone and we call this region of the ethmoid bone, the cribriform plate.
And these axons enter a part of the brain called the olfactory bulb, and there they
make synaptic connections with neurons that are in the bulb, and are actually
part of the brain. Now, if you remember what the ventral
surface of the brain looks like, from our tutorials where I showed you the actual
human brain specimen, you might assume that the olfactory bulb and this, this
long connection, is actually a cranial nerve.
Well, it's not. The olfactory bulb is part of the brain.
The cranial nerve that we associate with olfaction represents these axons that
pass through the cribriform plate. So this is our first cranial nerve,
cranial nerve 1. It's the axons of the primary sensory
neurons. That have a cell body in the olfactory
epithelium and grow an axon through the cribriform plate to make synaptic
connection in the olfactory bulb. This long extension then, that connects
the olfactory bulb backward toward the brain, this is called the lateral
olfactory tract. So, again, not a nerve, but an extension
of the brain. The cells in the olfactory bulb that grow
the axons that form this lateral olfactory tract, they are called mitral
cells. We'll talk more about that in a little
while, but for now I'll just mention that the mitral cells are then the principal
projection cells that connect the olfactory bulb to the rest of the brain.
And as we'll see these structures in the brain are part of what we call the
olfactory cortex. Okay, so here more schematically, we have
our olfactory epithelium, here, which is where we find our olfactory receptors.
The first cranial nerve connects those receptor neurons to mitral cells in the
olfactory bulb. And there are other cells as well, that
we'll talk about when we look in more detail at the, cellular structure of the
olfactory bulb. So the axons of the mitral cells project
through the lateral olfactory tract to a series of targets.
That are found in the ventral and medial aspects of the forebrain.
Now, collectively we call these targets the olfactory cortex.
Some of these structures are quite prominent and clearly are cortical in
nature such as the pyriform cortex. here we're spelling it with a y, you'll
notice in my handout I spell it with a, with an ipiri.
You'll see spellings both ways, so either spelling is acceptable.
Don't worry about that. another major cortical structure that is
clearly laminated and recognizable as cortex, is the entorhinal cortex.
So this is cortex, a little bit more posterior back on the medial aspect of
the temporal lobe. It's part of what we call the hippocampal
formation. Now these two other components, the
olfactory tubercle and the amygdala, these are structures that we considered
to be corticoid structures. And so this is simply a way of saying,
well, they are derived from the same kind of embryological tissue that formed the
beautiful laminated cortex. However, the organization of the cells is
not quite so clearly laminar. So from that perspective, we call this
corticoid. Now I should emphasize that each of these
divisions of. The olfactory cortex are heavily
interconnected with one another. While sometimes we tend to focus on the
pyriform cortex really it's this entire extended network of cells that constitute
our olfactory cortex. Well in addition to intrinsic
associational connections, these divisions of the olfactory cortex also
have projections to other parts of the brain.
And this includes the thalamus, the hypothalamus, and especially important,
is the orbital and frontal parts of the prefrontal cortex, that is the part of
the frontal lobe that sits just above the orbits of the eyes.
As we'll come to discuss, as we move along through this set of tutorials.
It's here in the orbitofrontal cortex that information from all of our chemo
sensory systems is combined with somatic sensation and, and even visual
sensations. And it's in this part of the brain that
our concept of flavor appears to be represented.
As well as a sense of the rewarding value of food.
Now, of course in addition, food can be a powerful trigger for memory and for
recall, so it makes sense that the entorhinal cortex has direct access to
the circuitry of the hippocampal formation where new declarative memories
are formed. Now, let's look at these brain regions
from an anatomical perspective. And I'll go ahead and show you my brain
model. just to remind you in a bit more
realistic fashion what we're actually looking at here.
So I think you can recognize nicely the olfactory bulb, and the lateral olfactory
tract that connects the olfactory bulb back to the olfactory cortex.
And even in this brain model, as you may remember from looking at the actual human
brain, it does look like a nerve. But again, I would emphasize, that the
olfactory bulb is really part of the human brain.
Well, the lateral olfactory tract then connects back to the inferior, and
posterior part of the frontal lobe, right near the junction of the frontal lobe and
the temporal lobe. That's where we find the beginnings of
our olfactory cortex. Well now, to look at our figure from our
textbook, that cortex is illustrated here in the green shade, and the first
division that we encounter of that cortex is the olfactory tubercle.
So, this is really a ventral part of the striatum.
So, it sits just below the main bulk of the basal ganglia.
We'll get to talk about that in the next unit but just to help you localize this
region it's just dorsal and a bit anterior to the level of the optic
chiasm. Which we see right here on the ventral
aspect of the brain. Well, the rest of the olfactory cortex
flows into the medial part of the temporal lobe.
So, there's a junctional region where the temporal lobe attaches to the inferior
and posterior part of the frontal lobe. It's there that we find this division
that we call the pyriform cortex. So this illustration, perhaps, is just a
bit too generous. Indicating a more medial and, perhaps, a
more ventral position of the pyriform cortex.
But most of the pyriform cortex is actually tucked underneath this little
region where the temporal lobe joins the frontal lobe.
Well, that leaves us with the rest of this medial.
parahippocampal gyrus, and that's where we find the cortical divisions of the
amygdala and the entorhinal cortex which receive the inputs from the mitral cells
of the olfactory bulb. Well now that you have a bit more
information about where the olfactory cortex is present.
I want to make just a couple of general points about the organization of these
olfactory structures, that are worth noting as we discover this anatomy.
First of all, I want you to notice, that there is no thalamic relay between the
sensory structures, that we might consider to be more peripheral, such as
the olfactory bulb. And the cortex.
Now, in all of the other sensory systems that we've evaluated so far, you'll
recall that there is a nucleus of the thalamus that receives ascending or
incoming sensory information and projects that information into cortex.
And this we think is, is quite important for how the sensory systems operate.
The thalamus, is something of a gatekeeper, to the flow of incoming
sensory signals to the cerebral cortex. Well this doesn't seem to be the case, in
the olfactory system. There is a connection to the thalamus,
but it happens after information has been processed in the cerebral cortex.
So, there's no obligatory thalamic relay between the olfactory bulb and the
olfactory cortex. So, the second point worth highlighting
is that as we detail the organization. Of the cortex itself and consider the
topic of sensory coding, what will be very clear is that there is no known map
of the sensory environment. And there may not even be a clear map of
the sensory periphery at the level of cortical processing.
Now there are very precise rules that help us understand how our sensory cells
are related to specific neurons in the olfactory bulb.
The challenge in understanding olfaction, is that those rules are not conserved as
the olfactory bulb projects back into the olfactory cortex.
So at least no one has yet demonstrated in any compelling fashion, that there is
something like a topographic map of the sensory environment in the olfactory
cortex. In the way that we've seen it for a body
map, in the postcentral gyrus, a map of the retina, or the visual environment in
the occipital cortex revision, or even a map of[UNKNOWN] or map of the basilar
membrane of the auditory environment. So, it's as if the rules of coding seem
to be different in the olfactory system and that makes it very much worth
exploring and understanding.