Okay, well lets briefly talk a little
about spinal cord just a few points that I want you to take away from this
discussion of Spinal cord. One is that there is longitudinal
organization to the spinal cord which is to say there are segments of spinal cord
that could be recognized. By the attachment of 31 pairs of spinal
nerves. So, in the cervical region of the spinal
cord, we have eight pairs of nerves that attach.
In the thoracic region of the spinal cord, we have 12 pairs of nerves that
attach, one on either side, of course. And then both in the lumbar region And in
the sacral region of the cord we have five nerves that attach, five lumbar and
five sacral. And then finally there's a single
coccygeal nerve that attaches at the very bottom of the spinal cord.
So, when you add all those numbers up together we get the number 31.
So there are 31 pairs of spinal nerves. eight cervical, 12 thoracic, five lumbar,
five sacral, and one coccygeal. Now, that's one way of characterizing the
long axis of the spinal cord. Another way is to note that there are,
two regions where the diameter of the spinal cord is enlarged.
One in the cervical region, and another in the lumbosacral region.
Now, you can probably imagine what's going on here.
There's an expansion of the numbers of neurons, and the circuitry of the spinal
cord, that's related to these important locations, along the vertebral access of
the body. namely, this is where our arms are
attatching to the body axis and the legs. And in, and in these two regions of the
spinal cord, these are way o, the, these regions are where we find the nerves that
are providing motor output to the extremeties, as well as providing sensory
input. So there are enlargements, or, a increase
in diameter of the spinal cord. There in the sacral region.
I'm sorry, in the cervical region. As well as in the lumbosacral region.
And this thickening then, allows for an increase in the circuitry that is
required to govern the activities of the arms and the legs.
One other point to make before, we leave this view of the spinal cord.
I want you to notice where we find the location of the, inferior end of the
spinal cord. we find it not at the bo-, bottom of the
vertebral column, but we actually find it at about the level of l One or L2.
That is vertebral body levels L1 or L2. Well, of course, it didn't begin that way
as the spinal cord was first developing. It was approximately the same length as
the bones of the vertebral column. So the spinal cord filled up that space
within the vertebral column. But as we grow in, especially in early
life, the, the, non-neural structures grow at a faster rate so we end up with a
longer vertebral column than spinal cord, and as a result the spinal nerves end up
continuing to exit through the canals. where they first developed but now there
is a long length of nerve root that develops as the vertebral column grows at
a faster rate than the spinal cord. And what we end up with as a result of
all of this is, beautiful structure. Called the horses tail, or the cauda
equina. And so in the lumbosacral regions of the
spinal cord what we see are these long nerve routes that extend like a horses
tail. From the lumbosacral enlargement out
through the canals between the vertebrae. space called the anterior vertebral
foramina, that allow for the passage of the spinal nerve routes.
So, I say all that to emphasize that I don't want you to be confused about, the
nomenclature that we use to describe level within the spinal cord.
if we're talking about, for example, the l two level.
you need to understand are we talking about The spinal nerve.
Are we talking about the vertebra or the vertebrae itself or are we referring to
the segment of the spinal cord and always try to be clear about that as we're
talking about these anatomical issues. So for example, the second, vertebral,
body is found, right at this level here, and that's where we find the emergence of
the second lumbar nerve. However, that nerve attaches to the
spinal cord at some, significantly higher level.
So when it comes to understanding the relationship of Lesions within the spinal
cord to dormatomal levels of paresthesias or anesthesia it will be important to
know these relationships between spinal cord segment, nerve and vertebrae.
So I'd just like to make a few points as we look a little bit more closely here at
the vertebral column. what I want you to notice is that the,
dorsal or the posterior aspect of the vertebrae is off to the right, sort of
coming at you. And the ventral or anterior aspect is to
the left with the, dorsal/ventral axis running something like this through this
illustration. Okay.
So then it makes sense to recognize a ventral root that's coming out of the
ventral horn of the spinal cord. This ventral root is going to send
signals out to striated muscle. And these are motor signals leading to
the contraction of those muscle fibers. Now That spinal nerve is also going to
contain sensory axons that may be derived from special receptors in skin or some
other kind of structure. And the course of the axons will run
right that same spinal nerve so we call that a mixed spinal nerve.
And then there's a cell body that sits in a ganlian right here, and the central
process of that axon will enter through the spinal cord.
So, we're talking about the spinal nerve itself I want you to understand that it
is mixed with both motor and sensory components.
But once we get down to the roots then we have a ventral motor root and a dorsal
sensory root. Alright?
Now we also have something called the sympathetic chain.
Which is a chain of ganglia that runs in the long axis or the superior to inferior
axis of the spinal cord on either side. And we'll talk about this when we get
into a discussion of the autonomic nervous system.
But within these sympathetic chain ganglia are the neurons that innervate
viscera. innervate vascular, arterials.
basically, where ever there is sympathetic innervation of smooth muscle,
cardiac muscle, and glandular tissue. But that's where we find those kinds of
motor neurons in the sympathetic chain. And notice that the sympathetic chain.
Is connected by a series of small connecting rootlets that go back and
forth between the spinal nerve and the sympathetic chain as that nerve emerges
out of the canal fallen between the vertebrae of the vertebral column.
All right. Well that's really all that I wanted to
tell you today about cranial nerves and spinal nerves before having a chance to
focus in on the brain stem and show you the cranial nerves in the lab.
So, if you'll bear with me, we'll make a transition.
And when you see me next, I'll be in the neuroanatomy lab with a brain in my
hands. So I'll see you there.