So I'd like to now give you a broad
overview of the function of this part of the inner ear.
So we have a little region right here that's called the oval window, and this
Oval window is the site where the Stapes makes contact with the inner ear.
So you recall that the Stapes is the, most proximal of those 3 inner ears
ossicles and it functions like a little piston that moves back and forth, back
and forth, providing pressure on the inner ear at the level of the Oval
window. And that's the Stapes bulges into that
Oval window, pressure waves are transduced into the fluids that run in
the Scala Vestibule and the Scala Tympani.
And these fluids are then conducted along the entire length of the Cochlea.
from this site of inward protrusion here in the Oval window.
And then eventually, that pressure is relaxed with an outward bulge at the
round window. And along the way, there are vibrations
that are set up along this Cochlear partition.
From the base of the Cochlea all the way up through its Apex.
These waves of pressure that are conducted through the fluids that run
through the Cochlea, then, will cause a vibration to happen within this Cochlear
partition. And that vibration then will cause a
mechanical deflection of those tiny Silia at the tips of the hair cells and this
will be key for the transduction of this energy in to electrical signals.
Now what I'd like to do next is to talk about the tuning properties of this
Basilar membrane. And one convenient way to do it will be
to uncoil this Cochlea and stretch it out flat and have a look at the properties
that exist across the length of that Basilar membrane.
So that's what we've done here. this is a representation of the human
Cochlea. So here's our Stapes pressing back and
forth against the Oval window. Here's the round window where that
pressure is commensurately relieved. And now I think we can better appreciate
how pressure waves might travel from the Oval window out to the Round window.
With this point of continuity at the tip of the Cochlea which was, which is called
the Helicotrema. So on the superior side we have the Scala
vestibuli, on the inferior side the Scala tympani.
And what the movement of the Stapes does then is, sets up a traveling wave that
causes the Basilar membrane to vibrate up and down as these waves are conducted
throughout the Cochlea. And it's this movement of the Basilar
membrane, specifically the movement of the Basilar membrane against the
Tactorial membrane that causes the hair cell Cilia to move one way and then the
other. Now as we look at this Cochlea unwound we
need to appreciate some of the bio-mechanical properties of the Basilar
membrane. Brain that allow for that important
function to be performed, that is the decomposition of complex sound into
component frequencies. So near the base of the Cochlea, the
basilar membrane is considerably thicker. And stiffer, than what we find at the
apex. At the apex of the Cochlea, the Basilar
membrane is broader, and it's much thinner.
Than what we find at the base. And, this gradation we find between the
base of the Cochlea and the apex allows the Basilar membrane to map out in a
smooth progression tone. With high frequencies being represented
near the base of the Cochlea where the Basilar membrane is much stiffer.
And it will vibrate best at high frequencies, compared to the apex of the
Cochlea where the Basilar membrane is much more pliable and vibrates best to
low frequencies. So if we looked at, for example,
positions one and two here near the base, we find higher frequencies that give rise
to the greatest amplitude of vibration. Whereas positions six and seven now
vibrate best, with greatest amplitude with Low frequencies of stimulation.
Now, in addition to these biomechanical properties that establish this important
Principle of Tonotopy, or frequency mapping in the Auditory System, there are
active mechanisms that involve the Outer hair cells that fine-tune.
The way this coupling works between the Basilar membrane and the Tectorial
membrane. If we look then at this organ of Corti,
in the Cochlear partition. what we see is contact between the
Tectorial membrane and this organ of Corti, this Sensory Epithelium.
And the contact is in the form of these Sterocilia that grow out of the Apex of
these hair cells. These Outer hair cells.
They're innervated. But they're actually innervated by Axons
that have an efferent signal. So we can think of them as being motoric
in nature. The motor is actually in the hair cell
itself. So what these hairs cells do is they can
contract, and extend and as they do so they change the stiffness of their
contact with the Tectorial membrane. And this active mechanism then allows for
the vibrations to be fine tuned by the central nervous system.
Meanwhile, the Inner hair cell is innervated by Sensory Fibers, that have
grown out of the Spiral Ganglia. That sits near the axis of rotation of
this Cochlea. And these sensory endings, then, will
receive the electrical signals that are generated here in the Inner hair cells.
So, let's now see how this all works. So, as traveling waves run through the
Scala vestibuli, around the Helicotrema into the Scala tympani, this Cochlear
partition begins to vibrate up or down. And because of the pivot points of these
two Membranes are offset relative to the center of the Cochlea.
What we find is, a Shearing force develops as this Cochlear partition rises
upward and then recesses downward. This Shearing force deflects the
Stereocilia at the tips of these hair cells first in one direction.
And then in the opposite direction. So with each up and down cycle, there is
a wagging back and forth of these Stereocilia at the Apex of the hair
cells. And that movement of the Cilia will open
and close ion channels that allow ions then to enter the tips of these
Stereocilia and generate graded potentials in the Inner hair cells.
So let's now talk about how Sensory transduction actually works at the tips
of these hair cells. So as I mentioned earlier, there is a
third channel that sits in this Cochlear partition and it is quite special.
It has a different kind of media in it compared to what we find in our Scala
vestibuli and our Scala tympani. In those two larger channels.
The solution that we have there is called Perilymph and Perilymph is very similar
to the solution that based most of the cells of our body.
it has a relatively low concentration of Potassium and as you now know quite well,
within nerve cells Potassium is concentrated to quite high levels.
Now, the Scala media is really distinct in this respect.
It has very high levels Potassium. This Endolymph is enriched in Potassium
because of the activity of cells in a highly Vascularized Structure that has
extremely high metabolic activity. It's called the Stria vascularis and this
is an Epithelium that secretes Potassium and concentrates it within the Scala
media. Now why is that relevant for Sensory
transduction? So here is an Inner hair cell, and its
Stereocilia are protruding off the Apical surface of the organ of Corti, that
Sensory Epithelium, and at the very tips of these Stereocilia are Potassium
channels. And the Potassium channels from one
Stereocilia to the next are connected with a spring-like protein called a tip
link. And what that protein does is it connects
a gate that is on the Extracellular side of this Potassium Channel, from one
Stereocilium to the tip of an adjacent Stereocilium.
And as a result, as these Stereocilia wave in one direction, the tip links are
stretched, and that transduction gate is opened.
And when the gate is opened, then Potassium ions can rush down their
concentration gradient because remember, Potassium is concentrated to very high
levels here in the Scala media. So as Potassium enters through these
Potassium Channels at the tips of the Stereocilium, the hair cell will
depolarize. And a graded potential is established in
that hair cell with the influx of Potassium.
That potential eventually opens up Voltage-gated Calcium Channels That exist
on the sides of these hair cells. So now, not only does Potassium enter
through the apical surface of the hair cell, now Calcium rushes in through the
Basal lateral aspects of the hair cells. And as Calcium enters, then a Calcium
dependent Exocytosis of Synaptic Vesicles occurs along the Basal region of the hair
cell. Essentially, Neurotransmission occurs.
A Neurotransmitter then is secreted from these Vesicles.
And makes contact with receptors at the peripheral and of the spiral ganglion
processes. So this afferent nerve here then is
receiving synaptic connection from this Inner hair cell.
And with the release of transmitter binding to receptors, ionotropic channels
open up, and cations rush into that afferent nerve terminal, and an action
potential is generated that may then propagate into the brain.
Now, what I've described for you is what happens when the stereocilia are
deflected In a particular direction towards the longest Stereociliam, that's
the deflection that puts stress on the tip link.
Pulling open that transduction gate allowing for Potassium to flood into the
Stereocilia. Well, I mentioned that these cilia will
move back and forth with the upward and downward of deflection of the Basilar
membrane. As these Stereocilia then relax back and
are bent in the opposite direction, away from the tallest Stereocilium.
Then the stress on those tip lengths is relaxed and the transduction gate can
then close over the top of the pore of the channel.
So, the movement of these Sterocilia allow for the cyclical opening and
closing of this transduction gate, and one can imagine, then, what would happen
to the membrane potential. The membrane potential would rise, would
depolarize as the Stereocilia are deflected towards the largest
Stereocilium and then the membrane potential would fall or hyperpolarize.
As those tip links are now relaxed, the gates close and Potassium no longer
rushes in.