Well, let me say just a little bit about
the orientation of hair cells in our sensory epithelium because this turns out
to be quite important for understanding the function of each of our sensory
structures in our vestibular labyrinth. For the otolith organs, what we find are
the hair cells are arranged with a certain axis of symmetry that divides the
sensory epithelium within each of our otolithic organs.
So, for example, notice here in the saccule.
So, this is the sensory epithelium. In the saccule, this is called a macula,
meaning a spot. So, there's a special sensory spot in
each otolith organ called a macula. And these arrows here are meant to
illustrate the axis of symmetry of the hair cells.
Now, notice that in the saccular macula, there is an axis of symmetry that sort of
runs right down the middle of this structure.
And the hair cells are organized from shortest to longest going in opposite
directions, so the arrow points towards the longest stereocilium.
So, this means that if we're going to deflect these hair cells along their axis
for depolarization or hyperpolarization, then this saccular macula would need to
be rotated essentially along the y-axis. Which means, the saccular membrane is
going to be sensitive to deflection that would either pitch the head in a forward
tilt or in a backward tilt. Also, the accelerations up and down that
we would experience in an elevator would also be expected to be in line with the
orientation of activation that we find here in this saccular macula.
Now, let's look at the utricle and its macula.
Now, there is also and axis of symmetry here and there's a bit more of a
curvature to this axis. And what we find are that the hair cells
are arranged, basically with the opposite kind of polarity, that is the longest
stereocilium is towards the line of symmetry with the shortest being
peripheral to that line of symmetry. Now, this utricular macula is largely in
the horizontal plane. Not entirely, there's a little bit of it
that curves upward, but it's largely in the horizontal plane, while the saccular
macula is largely in the vertical plane. So, this means that this utricular macula
is going to be most sensitive to linear accelerations that we might make with our
head in the horizontal plane. If we were to tilt our head to the left
or to the right in this sort of a rolling action if we held that tilt what we'd
find is that is that it's really this utricular macula that is most sensitive.
And again, it has to do mainly with the fact that these hair cells are going to
be activated because of the axis of depolarization and hyperpolarization
would be activated as we tilt our head from one side to the next.
[SOUND] Okay. So, that's a bit about the organization
of the hair cells and the otolith organs. We'll come back to this.
What about the semicircular canals? Well, the semicircular canals are a bit
more straightforward. They're the hair cells are found in these
bulb-like structures that we find in here.
And these bulb-like structures are called ampullae or ampulla or a, a singular
bulb. And within that ampulla, there's a
sensory epithelium we call that a crista and that's where we find our hair cells.
And in each crista, the hair cells are arranged basically just in one direction.
So, unlike our otolith organs where there is an axis of symmetry, there's no axis
of symmetry in the semicircular canals. within that ampulla along that crista,
all of these hair cells will either get deflected together in one direction
towards the longest stereocilia or away from that longest stereocilium, towards
the longest was depolarization, away would be hyperpolarization.
Now, I want to talk about each of these classes of organs and consider how the
biomechanics of their function relate to the sensory transduction mechanism.
And let's first start with our otolith organs.
So, here again is the macula of the otolith organ.
And let's just say that this would be the macula of the utricle.
And what we find is that these hair cells are not just projecting out into the
endolymph but rather there's a gelatinous membrane that sits right on top of the
apical surface of this sensory epithelium.
And yet, on top of that gelatinous membrane are these calcium carbonate
crystals that we call otoconia and otoconia quite literally means ear
stones. So, we have basically a layer if calcium
carbonate crystals. We can think of it really as a layer of
pebbles that are sitting upon this relatively dense, relatively heavy
gelatinous mass. So, what would that mean if we were to
tilt our head in one direction or another?
Well, when we tilt our head, we're going to shift the distribution of that
otolithic membrane relative to the fixed structures of the sensory epithelium.
So, if we have a static tilt but, say, in the backward direction, go ahead and tilt
your head back if you like. What we find is that this gelatinous
membrane with the weight of it being pulled by the force of gravity we find
that that membrane would begin to slip in the downward direction relative to the
fixed sensory epithelium. And the result is that the hair cells are
going to be bent in the downward direction.
Now, remember the axis of symmetry that we found.
So, in this illustration, the hair cells that are here to the right are going to
be depolarized because they are being deflected toward their longest
stereocilium. But the hair cells on the opposite side
of the axis of symmetry are going to be hyperpolarized because they're going to
be deflected away from their longest stereocilium.
So, within each macula of, or otolith organs have the population of hair cells
will be activated by a static tilt. Whereas, the other half will be
deactivated or hyperpolarized. So, this is not unlike the situation we
talked about in the retina, where for the spot of light that strikes the retina,
half of the population of Ganglion cells for which that spot hits the receptive
field will turn on. Those will be our on center cells and the
other half will turn off. Those would be our off center cells.
So, we can think of this symmetry in the macula of the otolith organ as being
somewhat analogous to the on and the off structure of receptive fields in the
retina. only here now rather than there being a
physiological explanation, there's really a, a biomechanical explanation, the on or
the off or the hyperpolarization and depolarization simply has to do with this
axis of symmetry that runs through the membrane.
Okay, well, let's consider now what happens when we accelerate our head in
addition to when we tilt our head. So, this would be our resting posture
with the gelatinous membrane and the otoconia right on top of the otolithic
organ, so our hair cells will be in a neutral position, and what I just
described for you is the impact of that backward tilt.
So now you're familiar with the idea that gravity would pull that otolithic
membrane and there would be a shearing force that would depolarize half of the
hair cell population and hyperpolarize the other.
Well, we can also activate this system if we accelerate our heads forward.
So, if we start walking, for example, or just lean forward with our head,
basically what we're doing is that we are accelerating the sensory epithelium.
And that will sheer against the otolithic membrane, because of the inertia that we
would have as these membranes slip past each other as we accelerate the sensory
epithelium, which is, of course, fixed to the bones of the head.
So, forward acceleration would be similar to this backward tilt, at least for this
sensory epithelium. Now, movement in the opposite directions
would be expected to produce the opposite physiological results.
So, a forward tilt of the head would result in gravity tugging forward that
otilithic organ. And now, that sensory epithelium should
show the opposite physiological response. And now the hair cells that were
depolarized by backward tilt will be hyperpolarized by forward tilt.
And those that were hyperpolarized by backward tilt, backward tilt are now
going to be depolarized. Likewise when we decelerate, so if you're
walking and you come to a stop, now what's happening is that this sensory
epithelium is decelerating creating a shearing force against the otolithic
organ as the forces of inertia eventually allow for the stabilization of this
membrane back in line with the neutral position of the hair cell stereocilia.
So, deceleration is going to be similar to activating this membrane with a
forward tilt. Now, let's look at the physiological
responses of the actual cells that are giving rise to the signals that can be
recorded in the 8th cranial nerve. So, if we were to tilt our head forward,
what would happen is that there would be, a significant elevation in the firing
rate of axons in that 8th cranial nerve as long as we sustained the tilt.
And the reason is simply that as we start that tilt and then maintain it, gravity
has now pulled that otolithic membrane forward relative to the sensory
epithelium. So, these hair cells maintain their
deflection of the stereocilia towards their longest stereocilium that would be
consistent with depolarization. So, this would be a recording from an
axon that innervates such hair cells on one side of that axis of symmetry.
So, these cells fire tonically, so we call this a tonic or sustained pattern of
activation, as long as the head is in its tilted position and when we restore our
head to neutral, then the firing rate returns to rest.
Now, if we were to tilt in the opposite direction, the very same axon would be
expected now to decrease its firing rate. And that's exactly what happens.
So, if we're recording from the cell that was activated by a forward head tilt with
a backward head tilt, then that neuron is going to have a decrease in its firing
rate. So, it makes some sense then that there
ought to be a fairly high level of spontaneous activity in this system
because otherwise, it wouldn't be possible to decrease the firing rate if
the firing rate were already nil. So, having some significant measure of
spontaneous activity allows this system to either be increased or decreased,
depending upon the deflection of those stereocilia, okay?
So, again, let me just emphasize the major physiological point that I want you
to take away from this and that is that when we move our head by linear
acceleration or by tilt in the vertical plane, we are largely going to activate
our saccule. And this is again, because of the
orientation of the sensory epithelium, which is largely in the vertical plane,
but also, the direction of organization of those hair cells.
So static tilt forward, forward and hold and backward and hold or a elevator type
acceleration, up and down, that’s going to activate these hair cells that are
otherwise in this direction. In the same way, the maccula of the
utricle is arranged to be sensitive to motions in the horizontal plane.
So, linear accelerations forward or to the side as well as head tilt, tilt and
hold to one side or the other is going to activate the utricle macula more so than
the sacculus. Now, like most complimentary systems in
neuroscience there is some overlap so we can expect that any one kind of head tilt
or any one kind of linear acceleration is mainly going to activate one kind of
membrane or the other. But the other one will contribute to the
sensations that are derived from that movement to some degree.
And certainly if we move along some oblique axis of acceleration or some
oblique direction of tilt, we can expect both otolithic membranes to contribute to
the sensations that are derived from that motion.