Let's pick up our overview of medical
neuroscience by talking about the scope of the course. Now the scope of the course
is intended to reflect what we in the field of neuroscience
consider to be the core concepts that every educated person interested in the
field of neuroscience should wrestle with. These core concepts have been defined and
articulated by our professional organization called the Society for
Neuroscience. The Society for Neuroscience has created one of the very best sources of
authoritative information about the brain, and the field of neuroscience,
at a website called BrainFacts.org. I would encourage you to
visit there to complement your studies with me in
medical neuroscience. These core concepts are beautifully laid
out and illustrated on that website, and you can find them and
read a bit more about them there. But essentially, medical neuroscience
will cover these eight core concepts. First, and perhaps most obvious to those
of you who have an interest in the brain, the brain is indeed the body's
most complex organ. We will study that complexity
in various ways and hopefully, affirm that complexity. It's interesting to me
that in recent years, the Society of Neuroscience has
modified this core concept slightly. Perhaps, we're being a little bit too
parochial in our view of the brain but we are now asserting that the brain
is indeed the most complex structure in the known universe. It's quite a challenge we
have in front of us then, to understand this organ, and
to wrestle with its complexity. Of course, we will never in our lifetime
fully understand all of its mysteries. But I hope you'll be incredibly satisfied,
and even captivated by those principles and
those organizational features that we will describe, and that you will learn
in your pursuit of medical neuroscience. The next core concepts maps into our second unit of knowledge
in medical neuroscience and that is that neurons communicate through
both electrical and chemical signals. We'll spend quite a bit of time talking
about the generation of those electrical signals and how chemical messages
mediate communication among neurons. We will describe the organization
of neural circuits and talk about their genetic determination and
you'll see that genetically determined circuits are indeed the foundation
of function in the nervous system. We'll talk about this wonderfully dynamic aspect of brain function that
we called neuroplasticity. What we've learned over the course of
my career in the field of neuroscience is that life experience can actually
change the very structure and function of the nervous system. You'll learn with me some of
the principles by which that happens at the level of synaptic organization and
circuit structure. As we move on to the later stages of the
course, particularly in unit five and six, you'll learn that intelligence
arises as the brain reasons, plans and solves problems. We will try to unpack for
you some of those dimensions of cognition that are relevant for
what we might call broadly intelligence, recognizing that even that word
itself has multiple dimensions to it. The brain makes it possible to
communicate knowledge through language. As we explore the more complex
brain functions in unit six, we'll spend some time talking about
language processing and how the brain is organized to understand language and
to make language in various forms. The seventh core concept is that
the brain itself endows us with a natural curiosity to
understand how the world works. Now I can't state this core concept
without reflecting on a student I had many, many years ago who came to me one
day and said I think we need to give up. I said,
what do you mean we have to give up? He said, I just don't think that the brain
should be allowed to study itself. The liver doesn't get to do that. No other organ in the human body gets
to do that, so why should the brain? Of course, he was being facetious but
there is a point there. That the brain itself, gives us the capacity to ask the kinds
of questions that have brought us together in this global learning community
that we call medical neuroscience. We'll even touch on trying to
develop an understanding of where does that curiosity come from. And then lastly, we'll talk quite
a bit about primary discovery that have matured the field of neuroscience and
expanded its boundaries and thankfully, discoveries that have begun
to have an impact in the real world and the lives of real individuals. we will talk about how
fundamental discoveries, in and around the world of neuroscience,
promote healthy living, and new effective treatment for disease and
we're just getting started. I know some of you
are here with me because you are afflicted with such diseases,
or your loved ones are addressing them. I certainly want to be sensitive
to those of you that come with very personal motivations for
learning about medical neuroscience. I hope that you'll engage with us
through our discussion forums and share some of your stories with us as
we pursue this particular core concept. I've said quite a bit about
these core concepts and you'll see them repeatedly
throughout our video lessons. I hope you won't get tired of them. Because I truly do agree with those
academic and thought leaders in the Society for Neuroscience that consider
these to be the essential framework for all educated persons that are seeking
to understand the structure and function of the human brain. Now, a bit more about
the scope of the course. This content is organized
into 6 Units that will then unfold over a recommended
12 week course of study. We'll begin in Unit 1 in the first
two weeks and survey the structure of the nervous system, so we call this
aspect of our studies, neuroanatomy. Unit 2 is concerned with
neural signaling and that includes the generation of electrical
signals, the transmission of signals across synaptic junctions via
chemical neurotransmitters and the plasticity of those connections
that come with patterns of use. So that's Unit 2, and that will
occupy your studies in the third and fourth weeks of the course. After Unit 2, we pivot to consider what
we sometimes talk about as systems neuroscience, and this includes Unit 3,
which is a survey of the sensory systems, and that will take you from
weeks 5-7 in the course. Unit 4, a series of studies focused on
understanding movement and motor control. That will occupy your life in weeks 8 and
9 of medical neuroscience. Following the conclusion of those
two systems, neuroscience units, we shift gears a bit, and
consider how the brain came to be. Unit 5 of the course is
called The Changing Brain, which focuses on
the development of the brain from embryogenesis all
the way across the life span. That leads us to the final unit
of medical neuroscience, Unit 6, that will occupy your studies in
the 11th and 12th weeks of the course. Here we'll focus on the more
complex aspects of brain function that pertain to the operation of much
of this outer part of the cerebral hemispheres that we observe
from the outside of the brain. This is the cerebral cortex and
specifically the associational sectors of that cerebral
cortex will be front and center as we consider the most
complex aspects of brain function. Now, this is medical neuroscience and my goal is to take you through those
units of contact with a particular focus. And that is to understand how this
foundational knowledge in neuroscience relates to an understanding of the impact
of neurological injury disease. One pedagogical method that we
will use to address that framework is to use problem solving through
the study of clinical cases. Here's how I would like that to work for
you. The human brain, the human nervous system,
will be at the center of everything we do. But as we pursue our studies, we will increasingly begin to
introduce the neurological signs and symptoms that suggest a localized
injury in the central nervous system. We will use this iterative paradigm as
a way of first learning the structure and function of the nervous system so that
we can then predict what might go wrong, given a set of neurological signs and symptoms that a real
person would present with. As we move towards our final exam
in the course, you'll see that we will increasingly lead with those
neurological signs and symptoms. And see if we can't deduce or localize a lesion in the central nervous
system that would be consistent with what one would observe clinically through a
neurological assessment of a real patient. This process will unfold,
we'll build upon this, we'll increasingly shift towards clinical
case studies as the course progresses. This is exactly the competency that
professionals in the healthcare environment acquire as they understand
the basic framework of the nervous system that allows them to be informed by what
they observed In their patient interviews, and in their physical
assessments of their patients. Now,that you know more about
the scope of medical neuroscience, I'd like us to now turn our attention
towards the resources that available to you to support your learning.