Well I'd like to make just one additional
point before leaving this section to move on into the base of ganglia.
and what I'd like to talk about are these parallel streams that run through
different divisions of the stratum. So again what we have in view here are
the different parts of the striatum. Out here laterally we have the putamen
which is on the lateral aspect of the internal capsule.
On the medial aspect of the internal capsule in bulging in to the lateral wall
of the lateral ventricle we have the caudate nucleus and then where the
caudate nucleus and the putamen join together, inferior to the anterior limb
of the internal capsule. That's what we call the eventual
striatum. Or in this region, primarily, we call
this the nucleus accumbens. Now I would like to emphasize that the
basal ganglia is all about modulating movement.
And what distinguishes one stream from another, is what is the object of the
move Movement. Now I'm going to ask you to give me a
little bit of license with this idea of movement and apply it somewhat
creatively. Well, let's begin with a more concrete
application of the concept of movement. The putamen is all about moving the body.
So the putamen is the principal recipient of the inputs form the frontal motor
cortex and the parietal somatic sensory cortex.
So the putamen is about modulating the movements of the body.
The caudate nucleus received input from the frontal cortex, specifically the
parts of the prefrontal cortex that sit just in front Of the motor cortex.
the caudate nucleus is also receiving input from the anterior part of the
premotor cortex, which would include our frontal eye field.
So, the caudate nucleus is concerned with movement of the eyes, and with the eyes
also goes our mind. Our cognitive faculty.
So, I like to think of the caudate nucleus as mainly modulating movement of
mind. That is, going from one thought to
another. Often as we visually inspect our world.
So, what we look at is typically what we're thinking about.
Not always but, for the most part, eye movements and thought.
Go together, so the cautade is moving the mind.
The nucleus accumbens is receiving input from the ventromedial parts of the fore
brain that are concerned with processing emotion or affect.
So the nucleus accombands/ g is going to be involved with moving affect.
So, what do I mean by moving affect? Well, I mean the nuances of our emotional
life as we go from one moment in our day to another.
we have ups and downs in our emotions. And that's normal.
We ought to have a normal emotional response to the events in our lives that
move our emotions. That movement of emotion is facilitated
by the circuitry that run through the ventral part of the basal ganglia,
including those circuits that are converging in the nucleus accumbens.
So, please remember, the basal ganglia modulate movement.
And they do so, operating upon different modalities of information that our
converging on different parts of the striatum.
Okay, let's move on to the next section now.
If we go back a section, now we are cutting through, really, the fat part of
the internal capsule. So, what we have again is
This now broad internal capsule that helps to orient us to our view, but we
still have elements of the striatum that we saw in previous section the coda
nucleus is bulging out forming the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle and
that's a nice healthy looking coda nucleus that's what we should see.
And then now we have the putamen which is lateral to the white matter of the
internal capsule. And inferior to the location of the
cardiac nucleus. But there is now the globus pallidus
taking shape. Between the fibers of the internal
capsule, the putamen, and this other white matter pathway that we see now
extending across the midline. So perhaps some of you know what this
white matter pathway is down here. I'll give you just a moment to shout it
out. Hopefully you will recognize this as the
anterior commissure. So the anterior commissure is a helpful
landmark because it helps us recognize where we would expect to find the globus
pallidus. The globus pallidus sits in a bit of a
triangular region Between the putamen, the internal capsule, and the interior
commissure. In the next section, we are getting near
the posterior aspect of the basal ganglia, so perhaps we have a section
that is roughly in this orientation here. So we are losing the putamen and the
globus pallidus. it's still present as is our caudate
nucleus. So again, let's reorient, here is our
internal capsule. That streaming in to the region of the
cerebral peduncle. And on the medial side of that capsule We
expect to find the caudate nucleus which is this little bit of gray matter here.
It's getting smaller, because now we are developing that tail that's going to
follow the course of the lateral ventricle into the temporal lobe.
On the lateral side of this internal capsule, we have the putamen.
It's smaller than it was in the previous image, but it's still present.
And we also have just a small bit of our globus pallidus left.
It is just where we would expect it to be.
It's between the internal capsule and the putamen.
Another major component that's made its appearance in this section.
Is, of course the thalamus, which is this large egg-like structure that we see on
the medial side of the internal capsule. Now you may be wondering about this
limbic loop. Where are the structures that the nucleus
succubus projects to, and so on? So let me just point those out while
we're making our way through these sections.
So I did, in fact, show you the nucleus accumbens which is this ventral and
anterior region where the caudate nucleus and the putamen seem to fuse together
around the anterior margin of the internal capsule.
The nucleus accumbens sends inputs into the ventral pallidum.
And I recognize this triangular region as the globus pallidus.
The ventral pallidum begins to take shape just underneath this anterior commissure
and extends posteriorly just a bit. So this is the region that we would call
the ventral pallidum and the ventral pallidum provides the output from the
limbic loop. To the the thalamus and specifically that
output is directed to the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus, which is present
right about there. So there's our medial dorsal nucleus.
The medial dorsal nucleus provides output to the cingulate gyrus and other
divisions of the prefrontal cortex. Okay, so now that you've seen the basic
parts of the basal ganglia let's begin to consider the connections among the
various parts. So I've already talked a little bit about
this first point. What are the major inputs to the basal
ganglia? Hopefully you will recall that the inputs
to the basal ganglia. Are directed towards the striatum.
So, much of that input is derived from the telencephalon, from the cortex.
So, we see numerous projections from the cerebral cortex into the striatum, which
is the caudate nucleus and the putamen. So, all of this cortical input's
converging at the level of the striatum. The striatum is also the target of our
dopamine inputs from the substantia nigra pars compacta.
Okay? So, the dopamine is being released in the
striatum. That's going to be very critical for
understanding how the circuitry of the basal ganglia function.
So the striatum is really the key input station for all the loops that run
through the basal ganglia. For the limbic look in the basal ganglia,
same principles at play. We have projections from cortex only for
the nucleus accumbens, the cortex that's providing input.
Would be in the temporal lobe, as well as in the orbital and medial parts of the
prefrontal cortex. So these inputs from structures like the
amygdala, parts of the hippocampus, and then that orbital medial prefrontal
cortex are converging on the striatum and in this case it's the nucleus accumbens.
Our dopamine cells, for the nucleus accumbens, again are derived from the
medial part of the dark substance, that's what we call the ventral tegmental area.
And just as for the dorsal processing streams, concerned with moving the body,
so in this limbic loop, dopamine is released in the striatum.
In the nucleus accumbens. This will be very important for
understanding our nerve biological frame work for addiction.
I think we are now ready to talk about the circuitry with within the basal
ganglia. Now that we understand the conversion of
inputs into the straitum. So we conventionally talk about two
pathways that get information through the circulatory of the basal ganglia and into
the thalamus. There's a direct pathway because it's the
most direct connection from the striatum to the pallidum and then out to the
thalamus. And here's the anatomy of the direct
pathway through the basal ganglia. We've already talked about the inputs
from the cortex that come into the striatum, so collectively we can collapse
the striatum and call it the caudate putamen.
So this is just the striatum. the striatum sends projections to the
palatum/g. In the case of our body movement loop,
that would be the internal segment of the globus pallidus.
The internal segment of the globus pallidus then sends signals to the motor
thalamaus. The ventral anterior and ventral lateral
complex of the thalamus. Which in turns provides input to the
motor cortex. Now don't worry about the pluses and the
minuses and the transients and the tonics at this point.
We'll come back to that. For now I want you to focus on the
anatomy. So again we have cortex projecting to
strawatum. Striatum to pallidum, pallidum to
thalamus, and then thalamus back to cortex.
This is the direct pathway. There's an indirect pathway.
The indirect pathway, actually, I must admit, looks worse than it is.
What we have in this illustration is a combination of the direct and the
indirect pathway. So the direct pathway is what we find to
the right hand side of this figure. The indirect pathway is the portion of
this figure that is backed by that yellow field.
So the indirect pathway as its name suggests must be a less direct means of
getting information. From the striatum, through the palladum,
and on to the thalamus, indeed it is. The indirect pathway involves an
additional loop that runs from the external segment of the globus pallidus,
through the subthalamic nucleus, and then back to the internal segment of the
globus pallidus. So let's see how that works out.
So, so here's our indirect pathway now this area that's back by this yellow
color. And our indirect pathway involves
projections from cortex to the striatum. Projections from the striatum now
specifically to the external segment of the globus pallidus.
So, this is the more lateral division of that Globus pallidus body that we saw a
moment ago. The external segment of the Globus
pallidus projects to the Subthalamic nucleus, and it also has direct
projections to the internal segment. It seems as though this projection to the
subthalamic nucleus is really important in how the indirect pathway works because
the subthalamic nucleus then, projects back to the internal segment of the
globus pallidus. And now we're back into the confluence of
the direct and the indirect pathways, the internal segment of the globus pallidus.
Projects to the motor thalamus which then sends signals into the motor cortex for
the initiation of movement. So, when one considers the indirect
pathway. What I want you to appreciate is the
importance of this subthalamic nucleus. If the function of the basal ganglia is
to modulate the way the thalamus is interacting with the cortex, then you
might imagine that the subthalamic nucleus ought to be pretty important
because it's one way to either turn up or turn down the activity of this internal
segment of the globus pallitus. Well, so is the direct pathway for that
matter, but these two inputs converging And the internal segment of the globus
pallidus are very important in modulating or controlling the output of the basal
ganglia that ultimately is reaching the thalamocortical circuit.
So, after a short break, let's come back and let's consider the function of this
circuitry in the basal ganglia.