Okay, well, how did that go?
did you see your eyes move? were you surprised at how little,
perhaps, you saw? sounds like a great topic to kick to the
discussion forum, so why don't we do that and see if we can generate some good
discussion around what you observe during saccadic eye movements.
Well let's move on then and talk about smooth pursuit eye movements.
Now, smooth pursuit eye movements typically require a visual target.
It's really difficult to generate this without a visual target, you might want
to try that in the presence of a friend who can actually watch your eyes move and
And perhaps give you some confirmations to absolutely what you're doing.
But try to just sweep your point of fixation across the sky as if you're
watching a bird that doesn't actually exist, it's really difficult.
What you'll probably do is make a series of short little saccadic eye movements,
rather than sweeping your eyes as if you're tracking an actual object.
Well, I was recently taking a holiday with my family and we happened to be
seaside and surrounded by a variety of seagulls and I couldn't help but to think
about Smooth pursuit eye movements on that occasion.
While I tried to track the movement of these birds through crisp early spring
air and just reminded me that in order to make smooth pursuit eye movements one
really does have to acquire a visual target.
So this is typically how this goes. some visual target is moving across the
visual scene at some particular velocity as indicated by these red lines here.
with different velocities as indicated by the slopes of the line.
And if we were to decide to have a look at one of these Objects that's moving.
what would happen is that we would make a saccade to that target.
Very quick movement in about 200 milliseconds or less.
And then once we acquire the target, then we can track very nicely the movements of
that target, without that kind of jerkiness that I tried to demonstrate
with my finger just a moment ago. So, this is what's called smooth pursuit
and because a visual target is necessary the circuitry is going to be actually
quite complex. It's going to involve processing in the
visual parts of the cortex back in the occipital lobe but it will also require
activation of circuitry in the parietal lobe and in the frontal lobe, that's
involved in integrating the location of that visual target as it moves through
space, and generating the appropriate motor response.
So, we'll have a little bit more about That at the very end.
But for now I just want you to appreciate the complexity of the smooth pursuit eye
movement. It's actually much more complicated than
it may at first appear. Okay, so let's move on, then, and talk
about the next type of eye movement, the optokinetic movements.
Now, optokinetic movements come in different forms and different varieties.
And here's one example of an optokinetic movement.
Imagine that you're standing at a rare road crossing as I often do and a train
goes by. And that train generates a very distinct
pattern of linear motion from one side to the next.
And so there are various elements of that train vertical features, for example,
that are passing in one direction or the other through your visual field.
It's really difficult not to be grabbed by that visual stimulus.
And what happens? Well, what happens is that.
We tend to make a saccadic eye movement to some feautre on that train.
Maybe it's a window in a coach car, or maybe a door on a box car and then as
that object passes in front of us, we essentially make a smooth pursuit eye
movement. But very quickly our eyes reach the limit
of excursion in the orbit. And it causes us to make a quick saccade
like movement where we reset and acquire the next object that allows us to track
using our smooth pursuit system. Well again our eyes reach the limit Of
their movement in the orbit. And we made another saccadic eye movement
back. So this sort of saw tooth pattern is very
characteristic of optokinetic nystagmus. you remember this word nystagmus.
We talked about it when we considered the vestibular system.
It has to do with a nodding. That's what this word means, a nodding,
as if we're falling asleep. So there's a slow movement, and there's a
quick, reflexive movement in the opposite direction.
Well, just as we had a vestibular nystagmus, that could be an indication of
the fact that we may have been recently spinning.
Or, there may actually be dysfunction in the vestibular system.
So, we can have nystagmus without movement of our head being driven
entirely by the movements of the visual scene.
So this is why this is called optokinetic nystagmus.
To be distinguished from vestibular nystagmus.
So the stimulus here Is visual. it's the larg scale movement of a visual
seem. Now, not all optokinetic movements are
nystagmat. That is they don't always involve this
slow and then rapid fast restting. Sometimes optokinetic Kinetic movements
can simply help to stabalize our vision when there is extremely slow drift in the
visual scene. Well, in fact, we'll get to vestibular
occular motions in just a moment. The optokinetic system works in a very
complimentary way to the vestibulo-ocular system in order to stabilize our
fixation. So this graph here simply shows us the
gain of the optokinetic system and the vestibular ocular system across most
frequencies, and what we find is that for the optokinetic system the gain is quite
high when the motion is quite slow. So this is a very slow movement.
And the optokinetic system helps to stabilize our gaze when there's very slow
drift in the visual field. Maybe that drift is because our eyes are
moving ever so slightly. or it's because the visual world is
moving every so slightly. Well, as the rate of movement begins to
increase, then our optokinetic system can no longer keep pace and that's okay
because our vestibular ocular system now kicks in.
So once we are approaching movements at still a fairly moderate pace, you know,
nothing, nothing terribly quick about them, then our vestibulooccular reflex
can maintain fixation control while there is motion, in this case of the head.
So these two systems work in a complementary fashion at very low rates
of change our optokinetic system maintains fixation.
At high rates of change as our head is moving, than our vestibular ocular reflex
would help maintain our fixation through conjugate eye movement.
Well, that does bring us to a brief mention again of the vestibulo-ocular
reflex. I'll just again point you back to our
tutorial on the vestibular system, if you want to know more.
or refresh yourself about the vestibulo-ocular reflex.
It's detailed here in this figure, from chapter 14.
I'll just remind you that the whole purpose here is to maintain fixation as
we move our head, and so I'm trying to Maintain fixation.
Now at the camera while my head goes back and forth, and as I move my head to the
left my eyes rotate to the right. And the reason why is that as I turn my
head to the left I'm activating. The horizontal canal on the left side of
my head. That's driving excitatory signals that
are going to cross the midline. That's going to activate the motorneurons
on the medusa's nucleus, which will innervate the lacteral rectus and pull
that eye towards the left. Meanwhile there are inter-nuclear neurons
that will project from one of the dusons nucleus to the contra lateral ocular
motor nucleus and then that drive the contraction of the medial rectus muscle
and the other eye to produce the synergistic rotation.
Of both eyes in a conjugate fashion, exactly opposite to the motion of the
head. So the head goes to the left, the eyes go
to the right.