Okay, well, now let's turn our attention
to the parasympathetic division of the visceral motor system.
And we see that illustrated here, on the left-hand side of figure 20.1.
So the parasympathetic division, likewise, is a two neuron connection,
between the central nervous system and the viscera.
However, the first neuron tends to project a much longer distance than did
the first neuron or the preganglionic neuron on the sympathetic side.
And the second importance difference about our preganglionic neurons is that
in the parasympathetic division those preganglionic neurons are found in a
different location. They're not found in the thoracic cord.
They're found in the brain stem, and then, in the inferior end of the spinal
cord, in the sacral segments of the spinal cord.
So the preganglionics are found in different locations in the sympathetic
and parasympathetic side. And their axons tend to go quite a
different length with the parasympathetic preganglionic axons being distributed
typically to the end organ itself. Where the ganglia that receive the
synaptic connections are embedded in the end organ itself.
Consequently, the ganglionic neuron in this system extends only a short distance
to reach the effector tissue itself. So this illustration is not quite
anatomically accurate in that respect. These ganglia are often embedded in the
tissue itself. so the locations here are meant to be
more illustrative of this relationship between pre and postganglionic neurons,
rather than describing their actual anatomical location of the ganglia that
serve the viscera. Okay, well, with that said, let me just
comment about the neurotransmitters, since we're here on this slide.
And then we'll move on and see in more detail the locations of these
preganglionic neurons. So, the neurotransmitter of the
preganglionic neuron, like the sympathetic division is acetylcholine.
So, these preganglionic, parasympathetic axons that supply these targets emanating
from the brain stem and from the sacral spinal cord, are going to release
acetylcholine in their ganglia. Well, the post ganglionic
neurotransmitter of the parasympathetic division is also acetylcholine.
So, acetylcholine is a prominent neurotransmitter on both sides of this
system. Now, I should mention on the sympathetic
side, there is one place where we know that acetylcholine is the ganglionic
neurotransmitter. And that's right here in our sweat
glands. So the sympathetic division is what
activates our sweat glands, and it does so via the mechanisms of action of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine. But otherwise, we associate acetylcholine
with the parasympathetic ganglionic neurons.
And we associate norepinephrine [NOISE] with the ganglionic neurons on the
sympathetic side. Okay.
Well, let's now have a look at the anatomy of these preganglionic neurons of
the parasympathetic division of the visceral motor system, looking first at
the brain stem. So, these neurons are found in four pairs
of nuclei of the brain stem. And, beginning in the midbrain, we have
the Edinger-Westphal nucleus. Now, I hope you'll, you will recall that
this is the small parasympathetic nucleus that's associated with the third cranial
nerve. This Edinger-Westphal nucleus is found
just dorsal and a little bit lateral to the somatic motor neurons of the ocular
motor complex. So, we can find that in Sylvius and I'd
like to point that out in just a moment. But for now, just know that the
Edinger-Westphal nucleus is a parasympathetic nucleus of the midbrain.
The remaining parasympathetic nuclei of the brain stem are found in the caudal
pons and in the medulla. So in the caudal pons, we have a set of
nuclei that we call the salivatory nuclei.
So these nuclei, provide for parasympathetic outflow to our tear
glands and our saliva glands. Now, just at the junction of the caudal
pons and then down into the upper part of the medulla, we have our dorsal motor
nucleus of vagus and the nucleus ambiguus.
Now the dorsal motor nucleus of vagus is a primary source of axons that supply
visceral targets via the vagus nerve. one additional, contribution to that
vagus nerve, that is very important in governing the activity of the heart,
comes from a set of cells that are anatomically associated with the nucleus
ambiguus. So, the nucleus ambiguous really has at
least two distinct populations of neurons.
There are the brachial motor neurons, that supply the muscles of the larynx and
the pharynx. And then there are these parasympathetic
preganglionic neurons that are involved in slowing the heart.
Okay? So these are the four major sources of,
parasympathetic preganglionic neurons in the brain stem.
And here they are in cross-sections. So here's our Edinger-Westphal nucleus,
up in the midbrain. Somewhere in this location, we don't need
to attempt to find it precisely, are the salivatory nuclei.
My, my colleague, Mel Cant, who helped me write these tutorial notes for you, often
notes that, there are very few people in the world who know where to find the
salivatory nuclei in the, caudal pons in the upper medulla.
Well, a little bit more prominently and a little bit easier to find is the dorsal
motor nucleus of vagus and the nucleus ambiguus which are found in the upper
part of the medulla. So here we are in Sylvius and let's just
find the structures. So, if we, look at the midbrain section,
what you'll see if we follow back the nerve roots of the ocular motor nerve is
our ocular motor nucleus. So this is the source of the somatic
motor, outflow that governs those, strided muscles that we have in the
orbit. And, a levator muscle that opens our
eyelids. But just on the dorsal aspect of this
oculomotor complex is where we find our Edinger-Westphal nucleus.
So again, this nucleus gives rise to parasympathetic preganglionic axons that
have their cell bodies here. And then they grow their axon out through
the third nerve to constrict the iris in the eye.
Alright, so, next let's jump into the caudal part of the pons.
And somewhere in this tegmentum, in the, core of the brain stem, is where we would
find our salivatory nuclei. So we don't identify them in Sylvius.
I don't happen to be among the small number of people in the world that know
precisely where to look for these neurons.
I suspect I could find them if we were looking at a Nissl stain.
But, in a Myelin stain, there just aren't enough cells to produce a distinct
cluster of, of, gray matter that we could recognize in a Myelin stain here.
So I won't attempt to point out where those salivatory nuclei are.
However, if we go into the upper part of the medulla, maybe just go down one more
section. I certainly can highlight the location of
the dorsal motor nucleus of vagus. So this is a major parasympathetic
preganglionic outflow that supplies for much of the innervation of the vagus
nerve throughout the viscera of the thorax and the abdomen.
Now, in a more anterior position in the tegmentum, we find the location of the
nucleus ambiguus. And so with respect to visceral motor
control, this is where we find our cardio-inhibitory parasympathetic
preganglionic neurons. Well, that's it for the parasympathetic
preganglionics of the brain stem. to find the rest, we need to move into
the sacral segments of the spinal cord. So, let's do so.
And, find our way down to the, most inferior section in our brain stem spinal
cord atlas. And, here we are in the sacral level of
the spinal cord. I know that because there's a very large
ventral horn, and not much white matter associated with the spinal cord.
And if we look into the dorsal column region, we find that there is only one
division of the dorsal column, a gracile tract, no cuneate tract.
So, hopefully those cues are now beginning to register with you, as you
look at cross-sections at different levels of the spinal cord.
Okay, so we're looking for our preganglionic parasympathetic neurons.
And we find them in a location that's somewhat similar to where we found a
lateral horn of the thoracic cord. But in the sacral cord, we really don't
have a distinct lateral horn. Rather, we just have fairly, a smooth
outline of the dorsal horn and the intermediate gray between the dorsal and
the ventral horn. Then, of course, a very large bulging
out, ventral horn. So, we don't have a lateral horn, but we
do have a column of cells that we can recognize as our sacral autonomic nuclei
or our preganglionic parasympathetic nuclei.
So this is where they're found. Okay?
So, let's return to our slides and consider this arrangement in a more,
illustrative configuration.