One of the most important sulci in the
human brain is the central sulcus. And one might imagine when we look at the
human brain that it ought to be easy to determine which one is in fact the central
sulcus. Sulci, of course, are the term we use for
the spaces that we see in the surface of the cerebral hemisphere.
So one interesting point about the central sulcus is that sometimes it can be very
difficult to find in a human brain, because the brains often don't look like
the simplified figures we often see in textbooks.
But there is a way to find the central sulcus that's fool proof and to do so I
have to look at a specimen that's been cut right down the mid-line along the
midsagittal plane. So I'm going to put aside our whole brain,
and show you, a hemisphere that's been sectioned in the midsagittal plane.
So here we have a hemisphere, and, this broad structure of white matter here is
called the corpus callosum. Now just above that corpus callosum is a
gyrus called the cingulate gyrus. And if you would, I want you to appreciate
the sulcus that forms a space just on top of the cingulate gyrus.
This is called, conveniently enough, the cingulate sulcus.
So we follow this sulcus back from the front of the brain towards the back of the
brain, and we find that just past the middle of the hemisphere, there is a point
where this sulcus makes a sharp upward bend.
That's called the marginal branch of the cingulate sulcus.
Now, If we identify that marginal branch of the cingulate sulcus, and look for the
very first sulcus that intersects the midline, I know that this will always be
the central sulcus. So I'm going to just gently put my wooden
stick In that space, and then turn the brain around and we'll see if this is in
fact the central sulcus. So now as we look at the lateral surface
of the brain we've identified central sulcus.
And the other features that help us know for certain that it's a central sulcus are
the fact that it's a long sulcus that makes a lazy s shaped bend on its way from
the dorsal midline down towards the lateral fissure.
Which is a large space separating the temporal lobe and the frontal and parietal
lobe. Now to see the central sulcus even better,
I'm going to gently pull away some of this tissue that's covering the surface of the
brain. This is called arachnoid, and the
arachnoid ss a tissue that helps to create a buffering space over the surface of the
cerebral cortex. Underneath the arachnoid in life is
perhaps a millimeter or two of cerebrospinal fluid.
So as I tease apart this tissue, We can see the full length now of the central
sulcus, all the way from its medial terminus, along the dorsal midline, to its
lateral terminus, very near the lateral fissure.
It's worth noting how the body is mapped out along the banks of this sulcus.
The gyrus that forms the interior bank is called, the precentral gyrus, and this
contains, the motor map, of the contralateral body.
The gyrus that forms the, postcentral structure, is called, the postcentral
gyrus, and it contains, the somatic sensory map, of the contralateral body.
And there's a beautiful mapping of the body, from, the midline to the lateral
fissure. Beginning, along the medial surface of the
brain, where the central sulcus intersects, the dorsal midline of the
hemisphere. This is a structure where the precentral
and postcentral gyri come together to form a lobule, which is just a word that means
a larger gyral structure. This lobule is called the paracentral
lobule, because it contains the medial termination of the central sulcus.
The paracentral lobule, is where we have the representation of the contralateral
foot. This is the right hemisphere, so this is
where the left foot would be represented for motor control, and for somatic
sensation. And as we progress from the paracentral
lobule on to the dorsal, and lateral surface of the brain.
We ascend that body map from the leg up towards the hip region, and then into the
trunk. And then just where we see this
distinctive s-shape bend in the central sulcus, that's where we know that our body
map is progressing from the trunk to the forearm, and then eventually into the
region that represents the hand. Where we see this prominous s shape in the
central sulcus, that's the representation of the contralateral hand.
Again, with motor control being mapped to the precentral gyrus and somatic sensation
in the postcentral gyrus. Now this body map is exquisite.
And it's a map that perhaps not Michaelangelo would've depicted, but
perhaps Pablo Picasso, since there's a bit of a cubistic break in the human form
along the central sulcus, just below this s-shape.
Rather than continuing on with the representation of the hand and the digits,
just below this s-shape, we have now representation of the face.
So that the face now is represented for motor control in the precentral gyrus and
somatic sensation in the postcentral gyrus just below the tips of the fingers.
And the representation of the face carries on down to the lateral termination of the
central sulcus.