Okay.
Now, I think we're ready to consider in more formal, even mathematical terms, how
can we predict the equilibrium potential if we know a permeate ion and its
concentration gradient? Well, the good news is that this has been
worked out. And there's a formulation that explains
the relationship called the Nernst Equation.
Now, I don't want you to have to be, be burdened with the physical chemistry of
all this. I would rather have you get an intuitive
feel for what this equation could do because I think it's a powerful equation
in Neurophysiology. And we will refer to it from time to time
as medical neuroscience progresses, and even when we discuss clinical
implications of this phenomenon. So, the Nernst Equation allows us to
predict an equilibrium potential for any permeate ion.
And, we will indicate that potential with this shorthand called E sub x.
x being any permeate ion. Now, in the more formal version of this
Nernst Equation includes a number of factors.
It includes the gas constant. a measurement of absolute temperature in
degrees Kelvin. knowledge of the valence of the permeate
ion, that is the electrical charge on that ion.
a factor reflecting Faraday's constant, which is the amount of electrical charge
in a mole of univalent ion that might permeate a membrane.
And, of course, we need to know the concentration gradient of the permeate
ion which is a function of the concentration of ion x outside of the
cell, and a concentration of ion x inside of the cell.
Now, as I said, I don't intend to burden you with all this formality.
Rather, what I want to be able to do for you is to give you an intuitive feel for
how this Nernst Equation can be a powerful tool in understanding electrical
signaling in neurons. Now, thankfully, our Nernst Equation can
reduce down in fairly simple terms if we make a few assumptions.
One assumption that we like to make has to do with the temperature in which we're
recording. And we can either change body temperature
or room temperature, depending if we're thinking about neurons in our own head.
Or perhaps, in an experiment preparation, we might have on a laboratory counter
top. we can also make some assumptions that
reflect the impact of the fairly constant, for example the gas constant.
Basically, parameters to define the world in which we operate.
Well, if we were to do all that, we can express the Nernst Equation in fairly
simple terms. We can say that the equilibrium potential
for any given ion is equal to the number 58 divided by the balance term of that
ion times the log, base 10 of the concentration gradient.
That is the concentration of the ion outside of the cell divided by the
concentraion of the ion inside of the cell.
So, this is the form of the Nernst Equation that I do want you to know, and
it's provided for you in your tutorial notes, your handout for this session.
And as I've been suggesting, what I really think is important is that you
gain an intuitive feel for what this means.
So, for example, just looking at this formulation.
This means that the equilibrium potential for an ion is going to be proportional to
the concentration gradient, and that proportionality is going to be influenced
by the valence of the permeon ion. Now, let's start in a very simple
situation. Imagine, we're dealing with an ion-like
potassium. So the valence term is actually 1.
So now we can just imagine that the equilibrium potential for Potassium is
going to be 58 times the log base 10, the concentration gradient.
And to keep the math simple, for every 10 fold change in concentration gradient, we
can expect a equilibrium potential of 58 millivolts.
With the sign of that potential, having to do with whether the concentration
gradient favors the inside or the outside of the cell.
Now, I'd like to pause for just a moment and give you some study questions to
consider. These study questions are printed for you
at the bottom of your tutorial, so you can look there.
And I want to encourage you to respond to the questions online now, as you work
through this tutorial. Okay, while working through those
problems hopefully gives you some feel for what would be the impact of a change
in the concentration gradient of a permeate ion on the membrane potential of
a neuron. Now, as you have surmised I'm sure we've
been dealing with a fairly simple situation where we've had a membrane that
allows for the passage of just one ion. And, we've only really considered one
kind of permeate ion. And, of course, the solutions that are
found around neurons and within the cytoplasm of neurons has multiple ions
and membranes on real neurons. potentially can allow fr the permeation
of a large number of different ions. So, it's useful to have some formulation
that allows us to understand the equilibrium potential at any given moment
in time. If we know something about what ions can
permeate the neuronal membrane, and then something about their concentration
gradients. Well, there's one more equation to
introduce to you that allows us to do just that.
This is to predict the equilibrium potential when multiple ions may permeate
the neuronal plasma membrane. This equation is called the Goldman
Equation. And the Goldman Equation really is an
expansion of the Nernst Equation that considers the situation when there are
multiple permeate ions. So, what we have in the Goldman Equations
are terms that allow us to count for the permeability of ions, that's what these p
terms are, and we have concentration gradients.
With outside over in for Potassium, for Sodium, and then inside over out for
Chloride. Now, you may be wondering why is the
ratio of chloride inside to out reversed, compared to what we see here for
Potassium and Sodium. So, in order to keep the math as simple
as possible, we simply flip the sine of the ratio for Chloride, knowing that
Chloride is an ion with a valence of minus 1.
Whereas Potassium and Sodium are monovalent cations with a valence of
positive 1. So, to keep the math simple, to keep the
logarithmic functions aligned, we simply flip the ratio for Chloride ions with
inside over outside. Okay.
Well, with that said, we can use the Goldman Equation to predict at any moment
in time what is the membrane potential of a neuron that might vary in it's
permeability for any one of these three ions.
And, of course, this equation can be expanded to account for as many permeate
ions as we like. Now, let's consider the same kind of
model system. But now, let's make it just a little bit
more realistic by adding to the solutions on either side of the permeate membrane
Sodium Chloride. So, what we have now in our model system
is, on the inside, or the left-hand side, we have hop Potassium Chloride, low
Sodium Chloride. And then on the outside of this membrane,
we have a reverse. We have low Potassium Chloride, and high
Sodium Chloride. And again, to simplify the mathematics,
if we want to go there, we're going to stipulate that the concentration
gradients are tenfold from one side to the other for each ion.
Now, let's consider what we have in the resting state of a neuron.
In the resting state, the permeability of the membrane for Potassium is very
slight. There's a little bit of movement of
Potassium from one side of the cell to the other, specifically from the inside
to the outside. but not much just enough to allow us to
establish a resting membrane potential. So essentially, the permeability of the
membrane at rest for Potassium is so much larger than the permeability for Sodium
that we can completely ignore that contribution.
And what we find is that the resting membrane potential is very close to the
nearest equilibrium potential for Potassium.
Not quite, because real membranes are a bit more complicated.
But in principle, the resting membrane is explained by first approximation to the
Nernst prediction for a membrane that's permeable for Potassium.
Now, imagine there's some mechanisms in the neuronal membrane that can flip these
permeabilities. Such that the permeability to Sodium is
so much greater than the permeability to Potassium, that essentially this
situation dominates. Where now Sodium is so much greater than
Potassium, Sodium's the only permeate ion we need to be concerned with.
Well, when we do that, we would find that the membrane potential approaches the
most equilibrium potential for Sodium. And likewise, if we were to flip once
again those permeabilities, what we would find is that the membrane potential would
fall back down towards its starting point, its resting membrane potential.
Well, these considerations built upon your study with the Nernst Equation gives
us an intuitive feel for what's going on with an action potential.
The action potential is this explosive electrical event that happens within a
neuron, where the membrane potential depolarizes.
In fact, it even overshoots zero such that the inside of the cell becomes very
transiently even more positive than the outside.
And just as quickly as that depolarization occurs, the action
potential seems to fall back down towards rest.
Although, it actually undershoots the resting membrane potential.
That is, the inside of the cell becomes even more negative than it typically is
at rest, but just by a little bit. And then, it decays back to where we
started. These considerations of permeability
changes for permeate ions. Sodium and Potassium provide us with a
framework for understanding the ionic basis of the action potential, and that's
where we're going to go in our next tutorial.
But before we get there, let's just return to the Goldman Equation and
emphasize some of these considerations. Now, at the resting state, the Goldman
Requate, Equation essentially reduces to the Nernst Equation for potassium.
That is, the permeability for Potassium is so much greater than the permeability
for these other factors, that they basically disappear.
And what we have then resembles the Nernst equilibrium potential for
Potassium. And predictably, the membrane potential
then approaches that theoretical limit predicted by the Nernst Equation for
Potassium. At the peak of the action potential, the
Goldman Equation essentially reduces to the Nernst Equation for Sodium.
That is to say, now, the permeability for Sodium is so much greater than the
permeability for Potassium that the Potassium term essentially disappears.
Now, we've not talked much about Chloride.
And that's because for all practical purposes in this consideration, the
permeability for Chloride is very close to zero.
And what permeability there is Chloride will simply follow the movement to these
positively charged ions. So we can, essentially, take Chloride out
of the consideration. So again, at the peak of the action
potential, the Goldman Equation reduces to the Nernst equilibrium potential for
Sodium, such that the membrane potential approaches this theoretical limit.
So, as we've worked with the Goldman Equation just a bit I hope that you've
been able to develop a bit of an intuitive feel for how changes in
membrane permeability can change membrane potential.
Now, what we haven't talked about at all yet at is, how do those changes in
membrane permeability come about? Well, perhaps, the surprising answer is
that changes in membrane permeability are themselves influenced by the change in
membrane potential. This is the ionic basis for the action
potential. Which we'll have more to speak about in
the next couple of tutorials. For now, I think I can summarize the main
message that I've tried to convey to you in the following statement.
That voltage-sensitive changes in Sodium and Potassium permeability are necessary
and sufficient for the production of action potentials.
Now, before we talk in more detail in forthcoming tutorials about the ionic
bases of the action potential, I think it will be well worth your time to consider
more deeply the nature of Electrochemical Equilibrium.
This concept will come up in several more sessions as we continue to talk about the
basis of neural signalling and the properties of ion channels.
So, I would encourage you to view one last animation, also available at the
website that supports our textbook. It is Animation 2.2, which is all about
understanding Electrochemical Equilibrium.
You can find a link for that at the end of our handout for this tutorial.
So next time, we'll think more together about the ionic basis of the action
potential.