What we have in front of us is a coronal
slab through roughly the center of the forebrain and I want us to examine the features that we find deep within the
brain. On the outer surface, we have the cerebral
cortex which is just a few millimeters of gray
matter thick. And then beneath the cerebral cortex we
have white matter, and that white matter runs
in various directions throughout the hemisphere. There is some special white matter
structures such as the corpus callosum that are obvious in
this section. And then there's one that is not quite so
obvious but it's worth pointing out and it's
called the internal capsule. The internal capsule is a band of white
matter that allows the cerebral cortex to send axons to the
diencephalon in the brain stem and spinal cord below it as well as for
structures like the thalamus and certain cell groups in the brain stem to send
axons up to the cerebral cortex. For out purposes here the internal capsule
is a landmark that helps us orient the rest of the deep gray matter
visible in this section. On the medial side of this deep gray
matter we have a structure called the caudate nucleus. And the caudate nucleus is part of the
basal ganglia. The caudate nucleus sits just medially to
the internal capsule. And, it forms the lateral wall of the
lateral ventricle. Now, just on the lateral side of the
internal capsule is another bit of gray matter that's very
similar to the caudate. It's name is the putamen. So the putamen is this bit of gray matter that sits out here lateral to the internal
capsule. Now there's a triangular region between
the putamen and the internal capsule that is yet
another deep gray matter structure, a different
part of the basal ganglia that we call the globus
pallidus. There are actually two parts to the globus
pallidus. This pin is currently in the internal segment of the globus
pallidus and just on the outer side of that pin is what we call the
external segment. Now, these three deep gray matter
structures are principle components of the basal
ganglia and it's important to know their relations one
to the other and to the internal capsule. Also in this view, not in the basal
ganglia, but down here in the anterior part of the temporal lobe is the amygdala. The amygdala is a large mass of gray
matter found in the anterior medial temporal lobe, just in
front of the hippocampus. And the amygdala is very much involved in
alerting the rest of the brain to situations that might potentially be threatening or otherwise
alarming. Meanwhile these structures that we've
pinned here, the basal ganglia surrounding the internal
capsule, these are structures that are all about
movement. So now what we have in front of us is
another coronal slab taken just about a centimeter in front of the
first slab that we were looking at. And again I want to highlight the internal
capsule. Which is this band of white matter that
helps us orient ourselves relative to the gray
matter that surrounds it. And on the medial side of the internal
capsule is the caudate nucleus, forming the lateral
wall of the lateral ventricle. And on the lateral aspect of the internal
capsule is the putamen. Now in this slice, we don't have the globus palladus because the globus
palladus is a structure that we only see near the
middle of the basal ganglia. We're just in the front part of the basal
ganglia. And it's worth focusing on this region so
that we can highlight a portion of the basal ganglia where the putamen and the caudate nucleus join together just
inferior to the internal capsule.
This part of the basal ganglia we call the nucleus accumbens and I've given a flag
with the letter A for nucleus accumbens. Each of these three parts of the basal
ganglia, the nucleus accumbens, the putamen and the caudate, they're all
about helping to regulate movement. The putamen is involved in regulating
movement of the body right here. The caudate nucleus is concerned with
movements of the eyes and with movements of the eyes go movements of the
mind and of thought. So the caudate nucleus is involved in
modulating movements of thought. Down below, the nucleus accumbens is
involved with modulating movements of emotion or
mood. So we can think of these components of the
basal ganglia as all being involved with the
modulation of movement. What distinguishes them are their
anatomical connections and also the functions upon which they
operate. Now this coronal slab in front of us is
about two centimeters posterior to the last one
we just saw. And I want to draw your attention into the anterior and medial part of the
temporal lobe. Where two centimeters in front we had the
amygdala, now we have a structure known as the
hippocampus. And the hippocampus is one of those
fantastic names in brain anatomy that tell you
something about it's shape. The hippocampus is so named because of the
curvature of the cortex. As this structure folds in upon itself
much like the body of the seahorse. Hippocampus is a Greek word for seahorse.
And I think you can appreciate the curving nature of this medial margin of the
temporal lobe forming the hippocampus. We see it nicely on both sides forming the medial edge of the temporal lobe and
also forming the medial wall of the bit of the temporal horn of
the lateral ventricle. So, the hippocampus protrudes towards the
lateral ventricle from the medial edge. Now, what we have in front of us is an
axial slab from a different brain. And we want to look again and find the
same set of structures, the internal capsule,
components of the basal ganglia, and the hippocampus. Now let's begin with the internal capsule. From this perspective the internal capsule
makes a bit of a chevron shape in the brain. We can speak of an anterior limb to the internal capsule. And a posterior limb of the internal
capsule. Now let's look at the anterior limb of the
internal capsule. We can identify it, again, with a little
flag just to hold your attention on this bit of
white matter. On the medial side of that internal
capsule, we have the caudate nucleus which as you can see in this plane forms
the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle. So this space we see here, this is the
lateral ventricle and note how the caudate nucleus is
protruding out into it. On the lateral aspect of the internal
capsule we have the putamen. So there is our putamen. And in this specimen you can probably notice there are multiple little markings
here. And these spots probably reflect the
consequence of chronic hypertension. The small black dots you see are blood
vessels cut in cross section. And the whitish spots around them are
probably some scar tissue that has been laid down by
activated astrocytes. And these spots represent the consequence
of having tiny blood vessels pulsate under elevated mean arterial
pressures for an extended period of time. And you can think of these as local
regions of micro trauma deep in the tissue. Now just medial to the putamen but still lateral to internal capsule we have the
globus pallidus. So there's our globus pallidus in this
specimen, with the boundary between the putamen and globus pallidus being visible
right along this margin right there. So you have putamen, lateral to that
margin, and the globus pallidus on the medial
side. Now also in this tissue section we have a
nice look at the hippocampus. So here again is the hippocampus which is
on the medial edge of the temporal lobe as this cortex wraps around itself into
the shape like the body of a seahorse.