So let's consider our learning resources,
and we'll start with our course website. I think the website should be
rather intuitive for you, so I won't be labor its organization. I'll just simply note that on the
left-hand column, you'll find the content of the course organize by weeks,
and within each week there will be some texts that will introduce
you to the lesson of interest. There'll be some objectives for
you to consider. And then you have the content. And that content comes in the form
of video lectures from myself. And I would highlight that there
are notes files that accompany nearly every video lecture. And that note file is for
your own use, your own annotations. Many of them are available to
you as both a PDF document and a Microsoft Word document. And given your preference,
you can choose to acquire one or both kinds of formats and
interact with that however you see fit. Of course, I would just ask that you
consider this to be fair use for your own studies and learning. It is my intellectual property that
I'm willing to share with you, so please don't repurpose this for
any other reason. Just use it for
your own studies and advancement. We also have a fabulous new resource
that I'm so excited to introduce you to. It's a website called Learn Medical
Neuroscience that was created by a very special individual who was
with me in the very first edition of Medical Neuroscience and has supported
thousands of learners from all over the world since then, as a community
teaching assistant and now a mentor. Her name is Ellen Vos, and
I will now turn to Ellen and ask her to give you a tour
of this wonderful website that you can access at any time to support
your learning of medical neuroscience. >> Hello,
students of medical neuroscience. Welcome to the course. I'm glad to meet you. My name is Ellen, Ellen Vos. And as Vos is a very common
name in the Netherlands, where I come from,
I've added Wisse on Coursera, so you might meet me as Ellen Vos-Wisse
on the discussion forum. I was a student myself in 2013,
in the first run of the course, and I've been asked to be a teaching
assistant and mentor ever since. As a teaching assistant,
I try to help people on the course by giving them study tips
in discussion forum and by creating links to useful content,
explaining or going deeper into core concepts of the course on
the course wiki in a virtual lab. But the virtual lab was
not easy to access. You had to log in to the course, and then log in to the course
wiki again to get at that. So this year I decided to make a website
supporting the learners of medical neuroscience, and that website is
called LearnMedicalNeuroscience.nl. I want to take you on a quick tour there. We go to the homepage. We see our instructor, Professor White,
visualizing knowledge. And that is very important, but
it's important to do it yourself, not just look at other people's do that, because
the learning experience is far less then. And there's also the structure of
the website Learn Medical Neuroscience. There's the Learning Community, Virtual
Lab, which is the core of the website, the Learning Materials,
and the Neurological Exam. If I take you to the top, there we
have the main menu of the website and I want to take you to
the Learning Community. At the top you see the carousel of
images with GetNeuro on Instagram. So if you have an image there and you give it GetNeuro then it
appears on this carousel. I'll explain it later. The Learning Community, you can actually
benefit by active participation. Learning medical
neuroscience takes effort. It doesn't come easily. And learn socially on the discussion
forum is a great help. The discussion forum, on the course home page you follow
the arrow to course content. There is a menu at
the left of the screen and you can see a button labeled discussion
that takes you to the course forums. Make a habit to visit
the forums regularly. Start a thread, and when others start
to respond on it, go back to it and keep it alive for some time, and
join in in other discussions as well. Going to the discussion forum is
not at the expense of your study, but it really strengthens your study. There are the GetNeuro Challenges
by course staff. You're invited to join
in those challenges. And we'll go to the news page later and
I'll show you some of the winners of the first session of 2016,
of the first two GetNeuro Challenges. There are also Google Hangouts
that students have the opportunity to ask questions
directly to Professor White. They are usually very stimulating events. And the video embedded here is from a hangout later in the first session,
the last session of medical neuroscience, so all students were advanced
in their studies then. So don't hesitate to ask
explanatory questions as well. In the second hangout of
the 2016 last session, Grace from Denmark has very
good questions on nature, nurture, and self-organization, and
Professor White starts explaining. I had taken the course four times,
seen the videos multiple times, but that session during that hangout
gave me so much more insight. I really learned from that. There's also an active Facebook group
with a lot of social interactions. It's a lot of fun, and
I advise you to join. There are some pictures of
neuroscience behind the scenes. Okay, let's go to the Virtual Lab. The Virtual Lab is really
a scroll-down menu. And I want to go to the Virtual Lab
itself, so I click the Virtual Lab. And there you see the layout
of those Virtual Lab pages and the Neurological Exam,
they all have a featured video on the top. They don't have the news and the additional menu on
the right side of the screen. Our featured videos are diffusely
connected with the course, so I'll show you one in neural signaling. That is, they have information on not only
the unit or the place they are presented in but usually with more
places within the course. Here is the structure of the Virtual Lab. You have the General Resources, the Unit
Pages, and Additional Neuroscience Sites. I want to take you to
the General Resources. If I scroll down I want to I
click Neuroscience, 2nd edition, the first resource, and
that takes you to the second edition of the Neuroscience textbook
on the NCBI bookshelf. It is not easily searchable,
it shows you the content and if you want to look into this book,
you have to enter the key term and search this book and
then you can get the information. I'll show you more about it later when
we get to the summary of pathways. Closed it again, and
then I go click the glossary that takes you to the webpage
of the course textbook and it gives you a very good glossary which
can be very useful in your studies. And then I want to go to Genes to
Cognition Online, and I click the 3D brain on the right side of the screen and
there you get the whole brain. And if you mouse over it, you see
the different parts and you get the names. With a button on the left-hand side, you
can rotate it and go from left to right. But I want to show you something else. I want to go to the drop-down menu,
and I select thalamus. That really shows you the thalamus
in its surroundings, in a way that it's situated in the forebrain,
so it really tells you a lot more. If you go to the left side,
you get more information, the overview of the thalamus,
a case study, associated functions, and associated cognitive disorders
associated with damage. So this resource is important
in more stages in the course. It's important in neuroanatomy but
also for the final exam. So we will find this resource
on more places of the website. It is intended to be like that,
it's not an oversight of me. Because people enter the website
at very different pages and I don't want people to miss it. I close this again and
we go to handwritten tutorials. This is the homepage of
the handwritten tutorials. These are another resource that I like
because they are schematic drawings of structures which
the information is built up. That, it's drawn first, and
then the names are given. So it can takes you step by step
through a whole lot of information. If we go to Brainstem Anatomy
1 Midsagittal structure, you see the video on the left. And I want to show you the complete
picture at this moment. So I click the drawing and there you see the completed picture that
is completed at the end of the video. And you can use that for your own study
and to start drawing for yourself, of course. I close that now, I close brainstem
anatomy, and I scroll back to the top. I go to Virtual Lab Unit 1, Neuroanatomy. Here I want to go to the second resource,
The Human Brain by Anatomy Amsterdam. I click that and then I go to Cerebrum
slices in a menu on the left-hand side. And I click the first
of the coronal slices. In the little brain at the top left, you see that it is a brain slice
very much anterior in the brain. Here you can put on, click on the labels. And then you see that those
labels are a bit more Latin. It is is bulbus olfactorius
by Professor White and the textbook talks about olfactory bulbs. So you'll have to get used to it
if you want to use this website. I turn the labels off, and then with
the little arrow in the button below that, I go to second, third, fourth slice, and
I give you with the labels. A lot of these structures,
you'll meet in the course. And by going from anterior
to posterior in the brain, you really get some insight in
three-dimensional structures of the brain. I think it's very useful, especially for
the people that do not have cell views. But even if you do have cell views,
it might a nice addition. Okay in the main menu at the left-hand
side, I take you to the MRI. And here again, you have frontal,
axial, and images. And you can put on the labels or not,
and you go from one image to the next, from posterior to anterior, or
from the middle to the side. I'll close this one. It's a very,
very nice website so do explore. Okay, and I want to take you to lateral
surface of the cerebral hemispheres. And I click Gross Cortical Anatomy
by Handwritten Tutorials. I want to show you a bit of the video and
just let you enjoy it for a bit and then we'll continue. We go to the YouTube site, and I enlarge
it because I like to look at it bigger. >> Hi, in this video,
I'm going to talk about the gross cortical anatomy of the brain. So we're going to be looking at
the brain from its lateral aspect. So I'll just draw it up here. There are two ways of
looking at the brain. One is its gross anatomy, which is just the anatomy as we see it. And the other is looking
at it functionally, so splitting up the brain
into its functional parts. Then we're going to look at just
the gross anatomy, and in the next video, we'll look at the functional anatomy and
how it relates. So here we have the central sulcus, and this is a very important
sulcus in the brain. >> Okay, well you can watch the rest
of the video for yourself but you get an impression of what
this resource looks like. I want to take you to Unit 2,
Neural Signaling. And here I want to show
you the featured video. You can look it on the page, of course. But that's a bit small. You can go to YouTube and enlarge it. And here you see what I mean
with connected with more units. This is neural signaling but it also tells
you more about what goes on in the brain. So it's relevant to brain anatomy. It's also relevant to Unit 3 on sensory
systems because there's a large collection of gray matter
nuclei in the forebrain. The thalamus that are important for
sensory systems. It's also important for motor systems
because there are other collections of gray matter nuclei in the forebrain,
the basal ganglia, that are important and that you'll need in the motor systems. And this video really sets
your frame of mind for understanding what goes on in and
around those nuclei. Now we're entering the brain. Look, and that's corpus
callosum over there, wonderful. Well, we close it, and we go back
again to learn medical neural signs. Here I want to show you a resource in
ionic basis of the resting membrane potential. The last one and action potential. Then you go to the site of
the neuroscience textbook. And those animations are wonderful because
they really build up the information and go step by step. You can go through the animation
narrated or through. I'm going to take you through though. And I want to go to slides 7. That shows you the action potential. And slide 8 shows you the action
potential and the Membrane channels that are important in different
phases of the action potential. If you go click further,
you can see them opening and closing in different phases
of the action potential. So, those are really valuable resources. You need animation from this textbook, but also from other textbooks
from the same publisher. I'll close this one. And we go back to Unit 3, Sensory Systems. I want to draw your attention to
a resource that was created for us by a community teaching assistant,
Jackson. Who did it in 2014. You may bring section cards and
bring section images for tracing tracts. I want to go to the tracing tract images,
click that, and you can use them to make your own
drawings and really enlarge your insert. I want to click the third one. Because that one is coming back in the
summary of pathways we're going to later. I close that. I go to the top again. And I want to go to additional
neuroscience sites. This is really additional information. Some TED playlists. How you again to contribute to
neuroscience when you have to map the neuron and
there's a neuro to see these are wonderful interviews on neuroscience like for instance episode five on grid cells and
navigation with [INAUDIBLE] and [INAUDIBLE] who won the Nobel Price for
their research And that interview really gives you an insight
in what neuro sign research is about. So if you're interested in that it
might be very nice to watch that and learn some relevant brain blocks there. Okay, I want to go to leave
the note virtual lap and I want to go to learning materials. There you have the brain
section images again. And here you have another in general
learning materials medical news that you another list of resources, but they are
not linking to resource websites Content, or explaining content, but more
a possibility to review your knowledge, so you can practice, and
practice, and practice again. For instance, the last one is
the practice problem from the text book. Professor White created the possibility
for you to create an account there and use this. There are neuroscience
book recommendations, and [INAUDIBLE] the summary of pathways. If I click that. This is a summary I made for
myself in 2013. And I started to share with in 2014 and
later years. And if we scroll down. We see a lot of images. These are copyright free so
I can share them with you. And if we go to page three we
see the dorsal column medial. You recognize the image because
that's from the tracing tracks images that created for us. If I go to the top. You can see where it is in
the 5th edition of the book, and the 6th edition will be
added later of course. And if I click the blue link, below that, it takes me to the textbook on
the neuroscience bookshelf. If I Type figure. Insert this book. It gives me one resource where I can look,
and if I click that, you can see image figure 9.6, which is a better Representation of the main mechanosensory
pathways that my drawing was. So you can use it for your own studies. You can't share it with others,
it's protected by copyright. So you can only use it for yourself. You can direct others to it like I did,
but you can't directly share the images. If I scroll down a little bit more,
We go to page seven. And as you see the facial pathways
from anna to me Amsterdam. Well there a lot of more things in it and
students find it really useful. So you can download it from my drive. There is also a summary on unit 3-4 and
summary on unit 1-2. We go back to the top, we click the neurological
Excel Which gives you information on neurological exam as you might have
guessed but also the neurological cases. A wonderful site from the University of
Utah that really gives you sort of method of learning the neurological exam and
doing the neurological exam well. There are also the clinical
neurology videos. They represent one of our member of our
learning community in January 2016. Plus a resident at the neurology
department in Madrid. And he presented to us
in the discussion forum. It's wonderful. It's a site with 700 videos
on neurological cases. To sell wonderful stocking material. There is a nice paragraph on dealing
with neurological constraint. It's really inspiring to see
people handle those constraints. If we go to Parkinson dances,
that's really very nice. You see the pleasure people with
Parkinson's disease can get From dance and it was really an eye opener for me to
see how things like that were possible. The feature from unit four
motor systems is also. There's also information on. She's a member of our learning community. She joined [INAUDIBLE]. January 2016. And she's a stroke survivor that
suffers from locked in syndrome. She has her insides in writing for
Huffington Post. I'll go to the top again. I click contact, And contact for students of
Medical Neuroscience you can contact me through the Learn Medical Neuroscience
subforum on the course website. You can ask me questions,
point out things to me, or you could write a news article
on general Neuroscience news. But I could copy and paste,
with your name of course, in a news rubric of this
website if you want to. There's a contact form for
people that don't belong to the course. And now we go to the News page. On the page is featured
the video news is also on the right side of the screen
as is the second menu. We go to News page And here you get the hang out teaching
award for Professor White, that's but something that is a lot
of pleasure that he got this award. And there is at the bottom the British
from the second get neuro context. You had to make an image of
something in your daily life or in nature that resembles
neuro electrical structure. And we have the tree roots,
the mandarin, and the cauliflower. The next one is important, the practice of neurology called
exam on a virtual patient. Duke is working on an application
with a virtual patient called Carl. And you can practice it for yourself. But also Duke can learn
from your experiences. So fill in the entrance survey and
the exit survey when you are finished with
doing three runs of examination. Duke can really learn
from your experiences and it's a way to give something
in return to the university. If I go to the next page, we get the winners of
the first GetNeuro challenge then you had to give an image of yourself
like [INAUDIBLE] medical neuroscience. And here we see writing and studying neuroscience while waiting for
her freight train to be loaded. From down under. And burning the midnight oil at 3 AM watching Professor White
studying neuroscience. So that's really very, very nice. At the right hand side of this page, you
also see the second menu of this website. That's about study strategy and
old study tips. I want to click Study Strategy. And there is sort of a road map for
your study of medical neuroscience. You can see that visualize your
knowledge is very important and you can find it there. I want to take you to
the general study tips. The first study to is practice,
practice, practice. With exams they are not only
there to acquire grades, they're great practice material,
so do them multiple times. That's very useful. If we scroll down, we see a wonderful, useful tip by
Nicole Foster on taking notes. There's more information though,
go and have a look. The study tips neural
anatomy The unit study tips do have a figure that I think is
useful for learning that unit and there's a kind of bonus they're copyright
free so I can share them with you. There's also most of them are also
in the summary of pathways. Well, there are also study tips for the
final exam and I'll give you some more. It tell you to go back to certain parts in
the course that are relevant and all that. So this concludes my short
tour of the website, learn medical news site I
hope you enjoyed the tour. I hope you will enjoy the course. And I look forward to meeting you
on the discussion forum, goodbye. >> Thank you, Ellen, for everything you've done to support
medical neuroscience over the years and thank you for creating this fabulous new,
>> Repository of information and resources of all sorts that I know
are students will greatly benefit from as they pursue their studies
of medical neuroscience. In addition to the content
that I prepared for you on our course website, there will also
be recommended readings from a textbook. >> That textbook is Neuroscience,
available now in a fifth edition from the publishers
Sinauer Associates Incorporated. Now I need to let you know that my
name is on the cover of this book so I have a bit of a conflict of interest in
pushing this book too strongly on you, but I do want to commend it to you. Obviously I'm involved with the project. I've helped to create a fair
bit of content for this text. It's a project that I believe in, and I believe in generally in
the value of textbooks. I have here the French
edition of this book. I'll just let you know that this
book is available from various distributors in multiple languages. So if your best language is not English,
you may look into see what translation of this book might be
available to you where you are. So I consider this to be a wonderful
option for those of you who prefer to have a book in your hands,
not just a screen in front of you. But I would also say that
it is entirely possible that you will be completely satisfied and
fulfilled in your studies of medical neuroscience even without acquiring a copy
of the book and pursuing the readings. But I want to give you as many
options as possible to be successful. Including knowing that there is an attempt to organize this course
around the structure of this book, so that you can count on the book to
provide a valuable resource for you. That will explain those
concepts with greater clarity then perhaps I have in my
video lessons with you. There's another book that I
would strongly commend to you. It's Neuroanatomy Through Clinical Cases
by Dr Hal Blumenfeld. This book is also published
by Sinauer Associates. Now I'm not assigning readings from
this book because in many ways, this book is actually a bit beyond
the scope of medical neuroscience. But it's a fabulous resource, for any of you that may be pursuing
the neurological specialties. The approach that this book takes, is to
lay out some foundational neuro anatomy. And then to challenge your understanding
through a series of clinical case studies. It's very much the method that we use here
in this course, medical neuroscience. It's just that the content of this book
goes beyond an introductory level. Which would be consistent with what most
medical students would learn in their first year of medical education. That's what we strive to achieve
in medical neuroscience. This book would serve those students well. But also more advanced learners that
are progressing deeper into their medical studies. Another resource that we will
use in medical neuroscience is an online atlas of
the central nervous system. Again, a disclaimer. My name is on this product. This is called Sylvius4 Online,
An Interactive Atlas and Visual Glossary of Human Neuroanatomy,
also published by Sinauer Associates. My partner in this project,
Mark Williams and I, have created this atlas,
and it is web served. If you choose to purchase our
textbook of neuroscience. Then a subscription to this
atlas comes with that textbook. Otherwise you could choose to acquire this atlas as a standalone subscription
directly from the publisher's website. So you can find that online, and
acquire that if you choose to. Again, it's not essential for
success in Medical Neuroscience, but I would recommend this atlas. If any of you may be interested
in acquiring an atlas, there's lots of free, interactive
atlases available on the internet. Sylvius has the advantage of
being the most detailed atlas concerning the internal
anatomy of the brain stem. Really the only atlas of its kind
that delivers content in that area, which will become important in units
three and four of this course.