Welcome back to this tutorial on lower
motor neuronal control of movement. In this part, I'd like to talk about
segmental reflexes of the spinal cord. So, the learning objectives that pertain
to this part of our tutorial are several. I want you to be able to discuss the
critical components of the myotatic reflex and how they interact to monitor
and adjust muscle length. I want you to be able to characterize the
role of gamma motor neurons in the adjustment of the gain of our muscle
spindle system. I want you to be able to discuss the
factors that account for muscle tone. I want you to be able to discuss the
critical components of the Golgi tendon reflex and how they interact to monitor
and adjust the force of muscle contraction.
We'll spend a bit of time talking about the difference between the contributions
of the muscle spindle. And the Golgi tendon organs to the
control of muscle activity, so that will be a, a key point of differentiating
learning objective number two from learning objective number four.
And then finally I want you to be able to discuss the critical components of
another type of reflex called the flexion or the crossed-extension reflex, and how
these components interact to withdraw a limb from a harmful stimulus.
Okay, so let's begin by talking about a reflex, the simplest of all reflexes that
we have through the circuits of our central nervous system.
It's called the myotatic reflex, perhaps you better know this as the stretch
reflex. The stretch reflex or the myotatic reflex
is a system that monitors and maintains the length of a muscle.
And the way this system works is through a beautiful organ that we find within our
muscles of our muscular skeletal system. And this structure is called the muscle
spindle. So, the muscle spindle is a collection of
muscle fibers that are found within a capsule.
And so, the boundary of these specialized muscle fibers by this capsule allows the
anatomists to call these intrafusal muscle fibers.
this idea of a fusi, fusiform shape describes the shape of this muscle
spindle or rather the capsule that surrounds these muscle fibers.
So, there are indeed muscle fibers within the capsule but these are very
specialized muscle fibers that are innervated by sensory axons.
So, here to the right on the slide, we see our muscle spindle, which is this
structure bounded by the capsule and within that muscle spindle, we see some
number of specialized muscle fibers. And those would be our intrafusal muscle
fibers. And notice that there are a number of
axons that are associated with this muscle spindle.
There are two types of sensory axons, there's the group 1A, afferent axon and
the group two afferent axon. The group 1A tends to supply the central
portion of these intrafusal muscle fibers, which is where the nuclei of
these muscle fibers tend to aggregate. The group two afferent axon supplies the
contractile portions of these intrafusal muscle fibers, which is found away from
that more bulbous shaped central region. And rather than wrapping around these
muscle fibers in a spiral type shape, which is what happens in group one axons,
the group two axons, they make a more limited type of ending that we call the
flower spray ending. And the flower spray ending is intended
to imply to the microanatomists that the terminals look like petals of a flower
that are blossoming on the contractile elements of these intrafusal muscle
fibers. There's also a motor supply to the
contractile portion of the intrafusal muscle fibers.
And this is from a small motor neuron that we find in the ventral horn of the
spinal cord, this is called a gamma motor neuron.
And we'll come back and talk about the critical role of the gamma motor neurons,
in adjusting the sensitivity of this muscle spindle to changes in the length
of the muscle. Let me back up just a moment, and say a
little bit more about these intrafusal muscle fibers.
They basically come in two varieties, so there are a group of morphologically
defined muscle fibers within this spindle that we call nuclear bag fibers.
And these fibers tend to have a more bulbous collection of nuclei in their
central reach within that intrafusal muscle fiber.
A muscle spindle might have a handful of these nuclear bag fibers and there may be
equal number or more typically a smaller number of nuclear chain fibers.
And these are a different type of intrafusal muscle fiber with respect to
their morphology, but also their physiology.
The morphological difference is that the nuclear chain fibers has their nuclei
arranged typically in a single row along the central portion of that muscle fiber.
So, rather there be than, so rather than there being more of a bulbous region that
collects as a bag would a collection of nuclei.
Rather, there's a chain a single row of nuclei that give this type of intrafusal
fiber it's name. So, in addition to being morphologically
distinct, there are differences between our nuclear bag fibers and our nuclear
chain fibers with respect to their sensitivity to stretch.
And how they contribute to our overall capacity of this spindle to monitor the
length of the muscle. Imagine, for example, that we're applying
a stretch to this muscle. So we're going from let's say length one
to length two, and we do so over a relatively short period of time.
Well, if we were to look at the nuclear bag fibers, what we would find is that
the axons that supply those intrafusal muscle fibers will fire a bunch of action
potentials especially during the change in length.
And they won't be quite so modulated as we maintain a more stretched length.
In contrast, the nuclear chain fibers, and more particularly, the group two
axons that supply them they would be more concerned with the maintenance of the
steady state that's then achieved, once that muscle is stretched to length number
two. So, again, the nuclear bag fibers they're
concerned with the dynamic aspects of movement.
And the nuclear chain fibers are more concerned with reporting the steady state
level that's achieved at the conclusion of the stretch.
Now, as you've already seen, these muscle spindles are very important in giving
rise to signals that we talk about in terms of proprioception.
That is building up of an awareness of the movements of the body.
And this awareness reaches consciousness via collaterals that enter the dorsal
column medial lemniscal system, but there is also an important signal derived from
these muscle spindles that supply to the cerebellum.
So, recall that the cerebellum receives input via a spinal cerebellar pathway
about the movements that the body is actually making.
Well, this is one important source of information that is supplied to the
cerebellum. Well, let's consider then how information
derived from these group 1A and group 2A afferents is actually handled in the
spinal cord. Well, the most common example that I
trust you all have experienced at one time in your lives or another, is
something called the myotactic reflex, or the stretch reflex.
And one common way that this is elicited clinically is with the reflex hammer.
So, what we see here is our typical knee-jerk reflex, where a force is
applied to the patella tendon. And what's actually being done here with
a tap of the tendon is a stretch is being applied to this quadricep muscle as that
stretch is applied. It activates our group 1A axons that
supplies the nuclear bag fibers in the muscle spindle.
So, I say group 1A, because it's a very quick dynamic sort of stretch its
supplied. And that's exactly the kind of stretch
that the nuclear bag fiber in the group 1A afferent is going to signal.
So, this sensory information runs back into the spinal cord?
yes there are collaterals that enter the dorsal column region that allow us to
make use of this information in central processing in higher levels above the
spinal cord. But, for now, I want to focus in on what
is going on in the spinal cord itself, that explains the knee-jerk reflex.
Well, the output that produces the jerk involves a contraction of this quadricep
muscle, right? So, in order to have contraction of this
extensors of the leg we have to have a motor output from the relevant motor unit
that supplies the very muscle that was stretched.
And this happens because the afferent fiber makes a monosynaptic excitatory
connection on this alpha motor unit. And so, let's just break down those
terms. Monosynaptic means one synaptic
connection, and it's excitatory. When the action potential arrives at that
presynaptic terminal, there's the release of an excitatory neurotransmitter,
probably glutamate or something like that, and a very strong synaptic
connection exists here. Such that the activation of this sensory
axon is very likely to lead to a super threshold depolarization of that motor
unit and the firing of an action potential that leads then to the
reflexive contraction of the muscle and the jerk of the leg.
Well, in order to facilitate this behavior, things need to be just a bit
more complicated. Now, there's also a flexor muscle, there
in the hamstring region and in order to move this limb,
ideally one would want to diminish the muscle tone that would be present in that
hamstring muscle, such that the quadricep can actually extend the leg.
Here's where an additional neuron is interposed between the sensory element
and the relevant rotor element. And that additional neuron is an
inhibitory interneuron. So this in inhibitory interneuron
receives the excitatory input from this one a a afferent.
And has the physiological action of inhibiting the motor output to the flexor
muscle. So, this neuron right here then becomes
diminished in its output to that flexor muscle.
So, by decreasing the numbers of action potentials that is supplying that flexor
muscle, the muscle tone of that flexor is now going to relax.
And this removes the antagonism about this extensor movement of the leg.
So, even one of our very most simple reflexes that we see in our central
nervous system involves the coordination of excitation and inhibition to achieve
functional synergy with the activation of one set of muscles, and the suppression
of an antagonistic set. The result of this coordination is the
smooth expression of movement. So, let's look at this from a more
physiological perspective with micro electrode recordings.
What we see is that, when there is a tap of the hammer on the patella tendon, we
see in our sensory neuron an elicitation of a barrage of action potentials.
So, that set of action potentials that leads to the activation of our motor
neuron that is innervating our sensory muscles.
So, this is monosynaptic exaltation of that motor unit.
Now, there is also mono-synaptic exaltation of this Inhibitory
interneuron. So, with the activation of that
interneuron, then we see evidence of the suppression of the output to the
antagonistic muscle, the flexor muscle. Notice, the suppression of activity that
we see during the time that that sensory input is sending its signals into the
circuitry of the spinal cord. So, we call this disynaptic inhibition of
the motor neuron that supplies the flexor muscle.
Sometimes, we call this pattern reciprocal inhibition because there is
monosynaptic excitation to the synergist and disynaptic inhibition to the
antagonist. So, we've been talking about the stretch
reflex as we've commonly experienced it ourselves in a clinical examination with
a hammer tap to the patella tendon, but I just want to make the point that this
reflex is operating all the time. consider the challenge of holding steady
a receptacle for some liquid that's being poured into it.
So, what's going to happen now is as we want to maintain a steady angle here
across our elbow joint we are going to be adding a load to the distal part of this
biomechanical unit. So, that increase in load is going to
stretch out this biceps muscle, and that stretch is going to be sensed by our 1a
and group 2 afferents and its going to activate the very same kind of circuits
that we just described in detail for the knee-jerk reflex.
Only now, these circuits are in the cervical level of the spinal cord and
they will provide output to the biceps muscle, which will cause a commensurate
contraction across that elbow joint which will allow us to maintain this angle at a
steady state position, even while the load is changing.
And all of this is going to require the activation of synergistic muscles, and
it's going to require the disynaptic inhibition of output to our antagonistic
muscles, in this case our triceps. So let's see how this works.
So, now we are adding a passive stretch which is due to the increased load that's
being placed here on the distal part of the extremity.
That's going to provide for a stretch signal in the muscle spindle and the
communication back to this circuitry via the one a and group two a ferrets.
And that leads to monosynaptic exotation, of the motor output to the synergistic
muscles. And it's going to lead to disynaptic
inhibition of the motor outflow, to the antagonistic muscles, and this allows for
the increase in resistance. And the restoration of the joint angle
that keeps us from spilling our our beverage.
So this is an example in everyday life of how this circuitry works.
So, in a more schematic form, we have some kind of goal that is set by our
motor cortex. And that goal is communicated down
through circuits that we'll described over the next several tutorials, and so
this allows the output from the alpha motor neuron to scale the muscle to help
achieve the goal of studying this receptacle against the changing load.
So, as some disturbances now added, in the form of liquid coming into this
receptacle, there is change in muscle length which is sensed by our muscle
spindles and now afferent activity is fed back to the relevant alpha motor neurons,
that then increase resistance against this changing load.
Now, not depicted in this schematic is the disynaptic inhibition that allows for
relaxation of the antagonistic muscles. But that two is part of the distribution
of this incoming sensory information to the spinal cord circuitry.