Well the story of the developing nervous
system really begins with this process that we call gastrulation.
So gastrulation refers to an invagination of the developing embryo at a stage that
we call the blastula. And this process of invagination in the
blastula produces three principle germ layers.
And those germ layers are the ectoderm, the most outer layer, the mesoderm, or
the mesoderm, which is the middle layer, and then the endoderm, which is the inner
of these three layers. This is a fundamental event in the
developing embryo, and it sets the stage for the formation of the nervous system.
Now one very important structure that is formed in this stage of development is
something called the notochord. Now, the notochord is a long, rod-like
structure that is derived from mesoderm. And, here if we make a cross section
through this developing embryo, will see the notochord here in this central
location cutting cross section. So, what's special about the notochord?
Well, I'll say more about that as we progress and talk about inductive
signalling. But the notochord is responsible for
sending out chemical signals that interact with this ectoderm that overlies
this rod-like structure that runs along the length of the embryo.
And these chemical signals induce a change and the fate of the ectoderm that
overlies this notochord. That region of this ectoderm
differentiates into a colon epithelium that we call a neural plate.
And this neural plate, or sometimes we call it neuroectoterm will begin the
process of forming the entire central nervous system.
So the notochord is responsible for reducing the differentiation from the
neural plate. I should also mention that the notochord
helps to establish our primary axis of orientation in the developing embryo.
The notochord forms in a more dorsal position in the developing embryo.
Now we'll call it a gastrula. And so the presence of the notochord
helps us to find what is dorsal versus what is ventral.
the length of the notochord establishes the anterior to posterior axis of the
developing embryo. And the fact that it's a mid-line
structure helps to define the axis from medial out to lateral, obviously, in both
directions. So, the presence of the notochord helps
to define the bilateral axis of symmetry in the developing nervous system.
Well following gastrulation and the development of the notochord and the
onset of inductive signaling that forms the neural plate, the next major phase of
embryo genesis is called neurulation. Neurulation is defined by the initial
formation of the nervous system. And what happens in neurulation is that
the neural plate begins to rise up in it's lateral margins.
And begins to close off in a process that will form a tube out of that neural
plate. So this begins with the formation of a
groove that runs the anterior to posterior length of the embryo just above
the notochord. And as the walls of this neural tube
begin to grow out, they begin to come together along the dorsal midline.
And we can see that process transpiring over, weeks, three into week four in,
human embryo genesis. Here we proceed a little bit further, and
we can see that now the neural tube has actually closed off underneath this over
lying ectoderm. And there is a progressive closure of
this neural tube that begins near center of this developing neural tube and then
extends out into the interior and posterior directions.
So this process continues and now we're into, well into the fourth week of
embryonic life. And we have the anterior end and the
posterior end of this developing neural tube progressively closing.
The anterior end of this developing neural tube is going to form the brain
and the rest of its length, all the way down to the posterior tip is going to
form the spinal cord. Now, I'd like to return to this concept
of inductive signaling, and say a little bit more about it.
Because it's at this stage in embryo genesis, neurulation, that the inductive
signals derived from the notochord are so important.
For defining many of the important regions of that developing neural tube
that will set the stage for further differentiation into the brain and to the
spinal cord. So if we back up just a little bit in
neurulation, so over here to the left we have the folds of the neural plate
beginning to come together to form the neural tube.
And the notochord is giving rise to these chemical signals that are inducing these
morphogenic events in this overlying neural plate.
But in addition to simply inducing the folding of that neural, well I should not
say simply, it's really an amazing feat in development.
That such a thing would happen, but in addition to inducing the formation of
this tube, the notochord is also giving rise to signals.
That are specifying some particular regions and one particular region is that
portion of the neural plate that directly overlays the notochord.
This becomes a region that we call the floor plate.
And this becomes quite important, because it in turn gives rise to inductive
signals that will influence the surrounding portion of this neural tube.
Now there's another special region, that responds to inductive signals, and that
is found on the dorsal side of this developing neural tube.
We call that the roof plate, and the roof plate will give rise to signals that will
influence the dorsal aspect of this epithelium that is forming the walls of
the neural tube. And one additional region I want to
highlight for you is that in the ridge of this folding neural tube that begins to
come together, there's a special population of cells here.
That we call the neural crest. And the neural crest will actually pinch
off from the margins of this neural plate as the neural tube is forming.
And the neural crest ends up sitting just along the dorsal and lateral margins of
the neural tube once that tube has formed.
Now the neural crest is a source of many different types of cells that are derived
from it. cells begin to differentiate and they
begin to migrate away from this region of the neural crest.
And as they migrate away, they are subject to chemical signals from the
nearby structures in the mesenchyme and in the mesodermal derivatives, such as
these somites that we see here, sitting just lateral to the neural tube.
So, as these cells migrate away from that dorsal lateral neural crest.
they are exposed to all kinds of signals that generate a rich variety of progeny
of these neural crests. And these progeny include both neurons as
well as non-neural structures. so, here's just a, a brief example of
some of the derivatives of this neural crest.
So the neural crest pro-generative cell can be influenced by various factors to
form our sensory nerves that we find in structures like the dorsal root ganglia.
Other signals can induce formation of the peripheral cells of the visceral motor
system. And so that would include our ganglionic
neurons that are are intervening our visceral tissues.
so, essentially the entire peripheral nervous system, including the enteric
nervous system, is derived from neural crust.
And, as I mentioned, also non-neural structures who derive from neural crests,
such as the chromaffin cells and the melanocytes and others that are not
depicted here. Now, how is all this accomplished, how is
this possible? Well, it is possible because of inductive
signalling. If I can just back up to this slide again
and just highlight the means by which these signaling interactions occur.
So, I mentioned the notochord is a very important source of inductive signaling.
the floorplate and the roofplate become important sources of inductive signaling.
As do the somites and these mesenchyme cells, through which the neural crest
derivatives must migrate. So, just to be clear, I've highlighted
for you in the handout what I mean by inductive signalings, so let me just draw
your attention to that. So, inductive signalling is the ability
of a cell or tissue to influence the fate of nearby cells during development by the
synthesis in secretion of chemical signals.
Now these chemical signals are either steroid hormones or peptide hormones, so
they have an impact on the transcription of genes in the cells.
That they interact with. The precise timing of the expression of
these inductive signals becomes crucial for the proper formation of the develping
brain. So what we will see is that in order to
form the nervous system correctly. These inductive signals need to be turned
on and turned off in a very precise pattern in both space within the embryo.
But also in terms of developmental time. And all of this is regulated in complex
way that we're just now beginning to understand.
And again, it's subject to probation that can produce various forms of defects in
the developing brain, as inductive signals might be either blocked.