Now let's turn our attention to the topic
of sensory transduction in the olfactory epithelium.
So here we have a closer look at the olfactory epithelium.
And what we discover are the presence of several types of cells that are present
in this epithelium. these spindle shaped cells, these are the
mature olfactory receptor neurons. These are the ones that are going to do
the job of sensory transduction. These cells sit within an epithelium that
is comprised of supporting cells and basal cells, and some of these basal
cells will go on to differentiate and divide.
And what we discover is that among this basal cell population is a set of neural
stem cells. Which from time to time will divide and
produce new mature olfactory receptor neurons.
As olfactory receptor neurons are lost to, degeneration or to injury and
disease. In addition to the supporting cells there
are glandular cells that produce a thick mucus that covers the upper portion of
this olfactory epithelium. So the way odorant molecules interact
with our sensory cells is by passing into the nasal passageway.
And diffusing through this mucus to interact with these olfactory cilia.
So these are hairlike extensions from this terminal bulb at the end of the
dendrite of this olfactory receptor neuron.
And embedded in the membrane of this olfactory cilia then, are the olfactory
receptor proteins that interact with the odorants.
The odorants then, will bind to specific molecular receptors that are expressed on
the membranes of the cilia. And through a sequence of molecular
reactions the binding of an odorant to a receptor leads to the depolarization of
the olfactory receptor neuron. And the generation of an action potential
at the axon hillock region where the axon emerges from the cell body.
And with a generation of an action potential in the axon hillock, that
signal could then propagate along the axons of the first cranial nerve.
Through the cribriform and into the olfactory bulb.
So now let's consider these molecular mechanisms that generate the
depolarization in these olfactory receptor cells.
And now let's turn our attention to the mechanisms of sensory transduction in the
membrane of that cilia. that is present at the apical end of the
dendrite of the olfactory receptor neuron.
So what we find here is a molecule that we've actually encountered a few times
before. The odorant receptor molecule is a
G-protein coupled receptor. That is, it's a receptor that interacts
with an odorant molecule. And on the cytoplasmic surface of that
receptor bind a set of G-proteins. The molecular structure of this receptor
makes it part of the 7 transmembrane class of G protein-coupled receptors.
The same class that we first encountered when we studied metabotropic receptors
for neurotransmitters. We encountered this class of proteins
again when we looked at the mechanisms of phototransduction and photoreceptors.
The opsin protein that interacts with the retinal molecule is an example of one of
the seven transmembrane gene protein-coupled receptors.
So, I think it is so fascinating that this same molecular structure has shown
up in so many different places in the nervous system.
and in each of these places the mechanisms involve transducing some kind
of an event. Be it the binding of a neurotransmitter,
the binding of an ordorant or conformational change in an organic
molecule when a photon strikes it. To a second messenger system that is
activated through a set of G-proteins. And in the olfactory receptor neuron,
this transduction cascade involves a G-protein that we call G-olf.
Or that that subscript identifies this as a particular G-protein that's involved in
transducing olfactory signals in olfactory sensory neurons.
So the odorant interacts with it's receptor, the G-proteins are activated,
and the activation of these G-protein then interacts with the downstream
target. And the principle downstream target is
adenyl cyclase III and when this enzyme is activated then, second messenger in
the form of cyclic AMP is produced. So, cyclic AMP levels rise when the
odorant interacts with the olfactory receptor.
The production of cyclic AMP, in turn, gates the opening of a cation selective
channel. This allows for calcium and sodium to
enter the cytoplasm of the olfactory receptor neuron.
This leads to the depolarisation of this nerve.
Now, there's even more synergy that happens within this olfactory receptor
neuron related to the second messenger systems.
As calcium begins to rise then, calcium interacts with calmodulin.
And this interaction of calcium and calmodulin then gates a chloride channel.
And that channel opens allowing chlorine ions to diffuse from inside to outside of
the cell. And as that negative charge leaves the
inside of the cell. This amplifies the depolarization of the
olfactory receptor neuron. So, together the influx of sodium and
calcium ions and the efflux of chloride leads to the production of the generator
receptor. That ultimately can lead to the
activation of our voltage-gated sodium and potassium channels at the base of the
sensory neuron. Where the axon is growing out from the
cell body. Activation of those voltage-gated
channels produces an action potential that can then propagate along the axons
of the first cranial nerve into the olfactory bulb.
One experience that I think is common to all of us is, the idea of adaptation of
our sense of smell. We all know that if we are in an
environment where we encounter a particularly strong odor over the course
of the next few minutes. Our perception of that odor seems to be
much less noticeable to us. While this is a complex phenomena, and
sensory adaptation has multiple levels to it.
one level is at the operation of the sensory neuron in the periphery.
But there are also central mechanisms of adaptation.
I want to highlight one known mechanism of adaptation that operates here, in the
olfactory sensory neuron. As calcium enters the cell, it can
interact with calmodulin and produce additional downstream effects.
One downstream effect of an interaction of calcium and calmodulin is an impact on
this cyclic AMP gated cation channel. The interaction of calcium and calmodulin
can actually reduce the sensitivity of this channel to the binding of cyclic
AMP. And this has an effect then a negative
feedback signal that is integrated at the level of this cyclic AMP gated channel.
reducing further influx of sodium and calcium.
Thereby reducing the depolarization with the persistent presence of that
particular odorant that's driving this cell's response.
Another mechanism of adaptation. Has to do with this exchanger that we
find in the membrane of the cilia. So this is an ex, exchanger that brings
sodium ions into the cell, and calcium out.
So as calcium is exchanged into the extra cellular fluids.
Then that has the effect of down-regulating the interaction of
calcium with calmodulin. this too contributes to the adaptation of
this olfactory receptor neuron, to the persistent presence of an odorant.
Well, next I'd like to talk about the interactions between odorants and
receptors. And this will help us understand a bit of
the logic for coding. That we find both in the old factory
periphery and also within central structures within the ventral medial
fore-brain.