Well, let's talk just a little bit more
about how information flows through the cortical network.
So I've already mentioned that our thalamus sends inputs up to layer 4
providing the main source of drive to this network of cells that populate the
cerebral cortex. There's also a small input to layer 6.
but the primary one that seems to have the greatest physiological impact is
destined for layer 4. Well, from there, cells in layer 4
interconnect with one another. But they also send major inputs to the
upper layers of the cerebral cortex, layers 2 and layer 3.
And once information gets into those upper layers of cortex, it can be broadly
distributed, so information can go in the horizontal direction from one region of
layer 3, for example, to a neighboring region of layer 3.
information can be projected through the corpus callosum to the corresponding
cortical area in the opposite hemisphere. So there can be long projections that
come out of theses neurons in layer 3 that enter the white matter, and
eventually, the corpus callosum. one can also find local connections from
these cells to nearby neurons within layer 2 and layer 3, as well as
projections that will drive the activity of neurons down below in what we call our
infragranular layers, those layers below the granular layer, layer 4, in layers 5
and 6. Well, those infragranular layers can give
rise to descending projections. Layer 5 cells can project to a variety of
structures in more inferior parts of the nervous system including the basal
ganglia the brainstem, and even the spinal cord for certain regions of the
cerebral cortex. Cells in layer 6 project back to the
thalamus, they also provide a return input to layer 4, where this cortical
circuit got started. Well, what I've been describing for you
is the flow of information through the cortical microcircuit.
And we believe that this basic flow of information, this basic circuit structure
exists across the entire cerebral cortex with some modifications, depending upon
the different cortical regions in question.
But this basic flow of information of starting in layer 4, progressing to upper
cortical layers, then down to lower cortical layers is a common theme of
cortical processing. Well, the circuitry performs a variety of
unctions. We're only beginning to scratch the
surface to truly understand what those functions are, but I want to give you a
sense of what the function is of this columnar circuit that we find in the
radial dimension of the cerebral cortex. We call this the canonical microcircuit
of the cerebral cortex. Well, I'm going to suggest an acronym
that makes sense in this part of the world, and I hope it might make sense
wherever you are. Well, if you know anything about Duke
University, you know that our Athletic Department is pretty important to the
life of this university. And one sport in particular seems to
dominate, and that's basketball. Well, for those of you familiar with how
basketball works in this part of the United States, you're familiar with three
letters, ACC. But you know that as the name of the
conference within which our Duke basketball teams compete, that is the
Atlantic Coast Conference, the ACC. Well, I'm going to suggest that we hijack
those letters and use it to remember some of the basic functions of this canonical
microcircuit in the cerebral cortex. I would suggest that the ACC of the
cortical microcircuit is amplification, computation, and communication.
Let me tell you what I mean. Let's consider first, amplification.
So, as I've already described for you, the thalamus provides the principle input
that modulates activity in cortical networks.
That activity goes into the middle layers of the cerebral cortex, layer 4, and from
there, it's amplified. So, one purpose of this network of radial
connections is to amplify this signal, and once that signal is amplified, then
new computations are possible. So the networks that we find largely
emanating out of our upper layers, our supragranular layers can take that
amplified signal, and now, compute new properties that were not carried with
that signal as it first entered the cortex.
We'll see some examples of that when we get into our sensory systems.
And then, also, from this part of the cortex as well as from deeper layers,
this information can be communicated broadly.
And, that communication can happen from one cortical column to the next, from one
cortical area to another, and even from cortical areas to more distant regions
that lie below the level of the cerebral cortex.
So amplification, computation, communication, the ACC of the cortex,
hopefully, you'll be able to remember that.
Okay, now I want to finally turn to the question of the organization across the
extent of the cerebral cortex, and this allows us to return to what we looked at
earlier, and that is the cellular architecture of the cerebral cortex.
This is what we refer to as cortical cytoarchitecture, cyto referring,
referring to cells, and architecture referring to the arrangement of those
cells. So I would just remind you that neural
tissue is comprised of a variety of different kinds of cells big cells, small
cells, from a physiological point of view excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons,
those that fire in various kinds of patterns.
just a tremendously rich diversity of cell types are found in the cerebral
cortex and these cell types are organized in columns, but those columns have
different compositions in different parts of the cerebral mantle.
We see some of them illustrated here in this slide.
So, for example, if we look in the visual part of the brain, back here in the
occipital lobe, we see an arrangement of cortex quite similar to what you saw
earlier in this tutorial. In fact, those histological slides were
taken from the visual cortex. And, if we moved a little bit more
anterior into the motor cortex, we'd see something that looks a little bit
similar, but some things would really stand out.
One thing that stands out is the presence of these really large cells in layer 5.
These are called bet cells and they are the largest neurons that we have in the
cerebral cortex. But there are a little bit more subtle
differences that you can appreciate once you, have a bit of experience looking at
the cerebral cortex. You'll notice that while, while the
granular layer 4 is very prominent in our sensory cortex, it's largely diminished
in its thickness, as well as the density of cells in our motor cortex.
That's because the function of the motor cortex is largely to provide output
rather than to receive input. As we progress towards the more medial
aspects of the brain and the more ventral part of that cerebral mantle, we
encounter a region of tissue that is wrapped into the medial edge of the
temporal lobe. And this tissue is perhaps the most
simple of all the regions that we find in the cerebral network.
the anatomists have chosen not to recognize six layers as we do in what we
call the neocortex or that more phylogenetically modern part of the
cerebral mantle. And what we find is an older part, a
paleocortex and even and archicortex. These are terms that we think reflects
the evolutionary history of the cerebral mantle in the mammalian brain.
Well, around the turn of the 19th to the 20th century European anatomists began to
develop a variety of ways of studying the cellular architecture of the cerebral
cortex. And one individual really stands out
among many seminal contributors of the time his name was Korbinian Brodmann.
So Brodmann was a German scientist who studied the cytoarchitecture of the
cerebral cortex. And he proposed a scheme for recognizing
divisions of the cerebral cortex that is still with us today and we call these
Brodmann's areas. That's what's illustrated here in this
color-coded representation of the cerebral mantle with all of these numbers
in place. So Brodmann was a fascinating figure and
it's a really interesting time in the development of modern neuroscience.
So, if anyone's interested, I would invite them to read a little bit more
about Brodmann. And for the rest of you you will
invariably encounter his nomenclature as we talk about different parts of the
cerebral mantle. So what Brodmann did was he looked under
the microscope at a Nissl stain and he recognized that different parts of the
cerebral cortex have a different appearance.
Very much like what is shown here in this slide that I just showed you.
And so Brodmann proposed, I think, a rather bold idea and that is, that these
subtle architectural differences that he recognized in the cerebral cortex had
functional consequences and his scheme has largely ushered in the modern era of
neuron science where we come to, recognize that different parts of the
cerebral mantle are specialized for certain kinds of function.
Now, we can get a little bit carried away with this conceptualization of the
cerebral cortex and have an erroneous view that cortical areas function in
isolation. That would be a mistake because different
parts of the cortex maintain, very specific interconnections with
surrounding cortical areas such that the cortex operates as an integrated network.
But nevertheless, there are networks nested within networks and the
recognition of Brodmann's areas allows us to talk about those networks in ways that
allows us to interpret our data. That we're generating with, let's say
functional magnetic resonance imaging studies as well as the more invasive
methods that can be done in animal model experiments where were looking at cell to
cell patterns of, to the function. Well I've hoped you enjoyed this brief
survey of cortical structure and function.
We will see application of these principles as we continue to explore our
sensory and motor systems. And hopefully, this concept of the ACC of
the cortical microcircuit will be a useful way for you to understand what
exactly does the cerebral cortex do in neural processing.