Well let's look now in a little bit more
detail at the molecular level as to how this happened.
Well we have our 11-cis retinal that is in the center of the [unknown] and when light
strikes this molecule, there is a rotational twist between carbon atoms 11
and 12. That converts the 11-cis retinal in to an
all-trans configuration. So you may remember a bit of organic
chemistry there the difference between a cis and a trans.
Well this confirmational shift is what leads to the activation of the
metabotropic element of the absent protein.
So, with that in mind, here is light striking our photo pigment.
And the twist that we see in that retinal molecule leads to the activation of a set
of g proteins that are affiliated with that opsin.
Those g proteins are called transducin. And one consquence of activiting these G
proteins is that a phosphodiesterase enzyme is turned on.
And that phosphodiesterase cleaves the cyclic structure of the cyclic GMP
molecule. And as a consequence then.
The cyclic GNP levels fall. And the channel goes from it's open
configuration to it's closed configuration.
Rather remarkable that all of this happens as quickly as it does.
Well, in neural terms it actually does take a bit of time which contributes to a
bit of the lag in the operation of the visual system.
The visual system is actually one of our slowest sensory systems, in large measure,
because of the time necessary for this photo transduction cascade to play out.
Well now let's consider some features of rods and cones that help to differentiate
their contributions to vision. Rods are extremely sensitive to light for
reasons that we'll mention in just a moment.
Cones on the other hand are relatively, insensitive to light .Vision, when driven
by rods, is characterized by low spatial resolution.
And this pertains to the wiring of rods to ganglion cells and the retina.
Cones on the other hand are associated with very high spacial resolution.
Putting these facts together, rods are specialized for very low light levels.
We call this scotopic vision. Whereas cones are specialized for very
bright conditions, such as this beautiful late afternoon here in North Carolina
where I'm talking to you today. So this photopic vision enables color
vision since color vision requires the activation of cones.
Well let's consider some of the physiology and anatomy of our rods and cones that
helps to explain these features. If we look at the response of an
individual rod and a cone to the onset of light, what we find is that in a rod,
there's a graded response. Graded by the intensity of the light
stimulus. But there's also a very sustained response
that adapts relatively slowly. Now contrast that to the responses of the
cone which also responds in a grated fashion but the adaptation is very quick.
So the metabolic mechanisms that are responsible for adaptation with any other
segment of these cells operate on different time scales with a much more
sustained response seen in rods relative to cones.
Another specialization pertains to the wiring of rosin cones to the ganglion
cells and this is shown rather schematically here in this figure.
Notice that about 15 to 30 rods connect up with a single bipolar cell.
Contrast that to the cone system given this one to one relationship and this cone
bipolar cell could be sensitive to a much more narrow spatial channel as photons
interact with the retina. We can consider the specializations of
rods in cones in terms of their physiology and their anatomy and begin to understand
how we can be sensitive to light over the incredible range of luminance that's
present in our environment. We're sensitive to more than to a 12 log
unit range and luminates. We can define an absolute threshold for
vision and this occurs under extremely dark conditions.
Imagine being in the darkest woods in the darkest night and your way illuminated
only by starlight. What little vision its possible under
those conditions is do entirely into the operation of our rod system.
This is called scotopic vision. Now in conditions such as where I find
myself now looking into the setting sun there is considerably more.
Photons in this environment right now and I suspect that I'm somewhere around this
amount of illumination now where our cones are responsible for the vision that I see.
The rod system has completely saturated at this point.
So all that I see in my world around me at this moment is due to the activation of
cones in my retinas. So these kind of conditions when cone
vision dominates are called photopic. Now there is a transitional region in the
middle called mesopic. Illumination and this would be
characterized by lets say, being out in the woods and in addition to starlight now
there's moonlight. Maybe about a quarter moon or more.
That would get us in this range where we are beginning to approach photopic
conditions. That are possible when there's nearly a
full moon. So this operating range is, incredible and
it is a really feat of evolution that we can remain sensitive to the dynamics of
light in our environmental across such a huge range in the physical world.
And that has to do with the responses of the neural elements and how they interact
with one another to actually produce the signals that are conveyed from the retina
to the brain. But one final specialization to consider
is the distribution of rods and cones across the retina.
Well, I've already mentioned earlier that in the center of our vision, we have a
very high density of cones. And here's what this looks like.
So what we have in the plot here down below is the distribution of cones shown
in green and very low levels in the peripheral parts of the retina.
But as we approach the very center of our gaze.
We find this very interesting specialization in the retina, called the
phobia. And in the phobia we have the complete
exclusion of rods. And what we see is a very high density
packing of cones, with minimal diameter to the outer segments of those cones.
Making them as sensitive as they possibly can be with respect to the spacial
arrangement of the distribution of photons that might be striking that retina.
As the cone system gets further removed from that center of vision, notice that
they're far fewer cones that are present and they tend to be much larger as we get
out. You know contrast that with the rod system
and what we find are that the rod concentration of rods increases as we get
near the center of the retina. But then it falls precipitously as we
approach the fovea to a total area of exclusion, and then it rises again only to
trail off as we approach the peripheral parts of the retina, where the density of
all photo receptors begins to trail. So this phovia then is quite an
interesting spot in the retina. Let's take a closer look at it.
If we looked at the architecture of the connections between photo receptors and
ganglion cells in the fovea, what we discover is that there is a pit in the
middle of our fovea and fovea itself means pit, but that central region is called the
foveola and in that foveola. We have a vascular free zone where the
blood vessels themselves are removed from the path of light striking the
photoreceptor. Not only are the blood vessels remouved
but the neuroelements of the retina themselves are pulled apart to the side
allowing for Nearly a direct access of photons to the photoreceptors and their
outer segments where the photo pigments reside.
So although light capacity's neuro-elements without too much of a
decriment, evidently in the center of the fovea there's some additional cost that is
invested to clear away those neuro elements allowing for maximal efficiency
phototransduction. Now as this illustration should make clear
this is a very important part of the retina for vision.
This is the part of the retina that can degenerate with age and with certain
genetic and perhaps dietary or environmental factors that interact with
our genetic constitution and what I'm referring to is the degeneration of this
part of the retina that is also called the macula, that means spot or yellow spot,
macula lutea. So the macula is at the center of our
retina, and the fovea is at the center of the macula.
So when this degenerates we lose the ability to see right in this central part
of vision. And if I can return to that scene that I
showed you earlier, this beautiful scene in Lake Louise in Alberta, Canada.
If the viewer now were to have macular degeneration they might lose their
capacity to see exactly what they might be interested in detecting if they wanted to
look at our faces it would be very frustrating because exactly their
direction of days is what would be most affected with macular degeneration.