In order to understand the human brain,
it's helpful to know some of the terms that we use to describe both location and
direction when it comes to brain anatomy. So let's just go over some of the very
basic terminology. Well, here we have an adult human brain.
And the front of the brain is here to my left and the back of the brain is here to
my right. So, the front part of the brain we call
the Anterior end and the back part we call the Posterior end.
So, Anterior is towards the front of the brain, Posterior is towards the back.
Now, of course, the front of the brain is also towards the nose, so for that reason
we also call this direction Rostral. So Anterior and Rostral, meaning, the same
direction for the adult human brain. Now, towards the back end of the brain, we
call that Caudal, although for reasons that we'll mention in just a moment.
That word Caudal, meaning, tail, doesn't exactly fit the forebrain, but it does fit
when we include the spinal cord. So, we'll get to that in just a moment.
So, Anterior Rostral towards the front of the brain and Posterior Caudal towards the
back of the brain. Now, if I turn this specimen, so that you
could appreciate the midsagittal plane dividing the left hemisphere to the right
hemisphere. I think it's easy to appreciate how we
talk about medial to lateral in brain space.
So, medial is toward the midline. Lateral is out towards the side.
And that's true for all levels of the central nervous system.
Now, sometimes which way is up could be just a bit confusing in the brain.
When we view the brain from the lateral surface, the top part, we can refer to as
the superior surface of the brain or the dorsal surface of the brain.
The lower part, we can refer to as the inferior surface, or the ventral surface
of the brain. But these terms get just a little bit
confusing when we look at the midsagittal plane in a different hemisphere.
So, let's do that. Now, with the midsagittal hemisphere in
hand, we can talk about position as it applies not just to the forebrain, but
also to the brainstem. Well, as I mentioned, towards the front is
what we call Anterior or Rostral, towards the back of the brain is what we call
Posterior or Caudal. But notice what happens in the
relationship between the hindbrain and the forebrain.
There is a flexure or bend that takes place in the axis of the brain as the fore
brain develops on top of the middle brain or mesencephalon.
So, all of this forebrain, seems to be running in the plain of the table, whereas
the brainstem is off at an angle, about a 120 degree angle relative to the plane of
the forebrain. That's what we call the cephalic flexure.
And below that point of flexure, these positional terms are applied in a
different way. So, when we talk about Caudal for the
forebrain, we're talking about the Posterior part of the occipital lobe.
But now if we talk about Caudal relative to the brainstem or the spinal cord, we
are talking about the inferior direction towards the tail, the cauda equina segment
of the spinal cord which is the most inferior stretch of the spinal cord.
So, towards the tail is quite literally toward the horse's tail or the cauda
equina, when it comes to the brainstem and spinal cord.
Now, what about dorsal and ventral? So, for the brainstem, dorsal means
towards the back. And if you can imagine this brainstem
extending into the spinal cord, towards the back, it would be on this aspect of
the brainstem. So, the cerebellum is dorsal to the
brainstem. Posterior, for the brainstem, is
synonymous with dorsal. So, if we talk about the Posterior aspect
of the brainstem, we're talking about its dorsal surface.
Likewise, if we're speaking of the ventral surface of the brainstem, we're talking
about the part of the brainstem and spinal cord that's towards the belly, or is
ventral. Ventral is synonymous with Anterior, when
it comes to the brainstem and to the spinal cord.
So, this can get a bit confusing. Again, just to review a few of these
terms. When we're talking about Anterior relative
to the forebrain, that would be In this direction, towards the front of the brain.
Anterior with respect to the brainstem, would be right in this location here.
Ventral, for the forebrain would refer to the inferior surface of the hemisphere.
The ventral for the brainstem is synonymous with the Anterior.
Now, finally, superior and inferior continue to mean towards the top of the
body, being superior, and inferior is towards the lower part of the body.
So, we can say that the pons is superior to the medulla.
And the pons is inferior to the midbrain. So superior and inferior are similar as is
medial and lateral. If we were to look along this midsagittal
plane, the cut surface is medial. Whereas the side surface of the brainstem
is what we would call lateral. So, medial and lateral are the same for
the brainstem and spinal cord as they are for the forebrain.
So, with some knowledge and some practice with these positional terms.
It will make great sense to you and we'll have, the capacity to discuss relative
position within the brain as well as among these superficial features with some
precision that can help us align the central nervous system with the rest of
the body.