[SOUND]. Hello again.
Welcome back to the second part of our set of tutorials on the Vestibular
System. In this tutorial, I'd like to speak to
you about Central Processing. This tutorial will again emphasize the
complexity of the human brain. And now, as we get into the brain stem
and to other stations processing of vestibular information, we will be
talking again about circuitry that is genetically determined and it will form
the foundation of the functions of the vestibular system and its impact on motor
control systems. My learning objectives for you in this
session are that I want you to be able to discuss the neuroanatomy and the
function of one particular. circuit that is very important in the
operation of our vestibular system. And that's called the vestibular ocular
reflex. And as we'll see, the vestibular system
are very influential in stabilizing the movements of the eyes in their orbits.
I want you to be able to characterize the contributions of the vestibular spinal
projections in postural control. Another very important aspect of
vestibular function is to stabilize our posture when the surface underneath our
feet is moving. And lastly, I want you to be able to
discuss the contributions of vestibular sensation to proprioception.
So let me once again provide a brief overview of vestibular function.
The vestibular labyrinth is an extension of the inner ear that's designed to sense
the motions that arise from head movements and the inertial effects due to
gravity. There are really two parts to this
vestibular system. There are the otolith organs and these
sense static head position and linear accelerations of the head.
Then there are the semicircular canals and the canals sense rotational
accelerations and within both kinds of membranous organs.
There are hair cells and the deflection of the stereocilia of these hair cells is
what accomplishes sensory transduction in these different divisions of the
vestibular labyrinth. So, in this tutorial, I really want to
focus on what happens next vestibular signals are relayed to integrative
centers in the brainstem as well as in the cerebellum.
And these signals are used to adjust postural reflexes in eye movements.
These signals also reach parts of the parietal cortex.
Where our normal sense of orientation and three-dimensional space's constructed.
/this is an important contributor to our body schema.
That is, our understanding of the position of our body and its movements in
the environment. Now, we also might have vestibular
dysfunction from time to time or perhaps as a result of injury or disease.
And that vestibular dysfunction can lead to really a devastating sense of
dizziness and disequilibrium. we call this vertigo and these very
powerful sensations arise when the circuitry is disturbed.
Or when the sensory signals are dramatically shifted towards imbalance,
even though the body itself might not be moving.
And so these sensations are obviously integrated across multiple levels of
processing, but ultimately at the level of the cerebral cortex.
Where these, these feelings of unease, and dizziness are experienced in
consciousness. Okay, well let's now talk about central
vestibular processing. So, recall that the cells that grow their
axons in the eighth cranial nerve are found in scarpa's ganglion and these
ganglion provide for the communication of sensory signals from the hair cells and
the otolith organs and semi-circular canals to the brain stem.
So these scarpa's ganglion cells grow axons that proceed into the brain stem
along the path of the eighth cranial nerve.
And as they attach to the brain stem in the lateral part of the junctional region
between the pons and the medulla, these axons innervate a set of cells that are
part of a complex of nuclei that we call the vestibular nuclear complex.
So, these vestibular nuclei are found in the lateral tegmentum of the upper medulla
and caudal part of the pons. Now there are some vestibular afferents
that grow directly into the cerebellum. Interior part of the cerebellum that we
called the floccular nodular lobe, or sometimes we refer to this cerebellar
division by it's functional term, the vestibul cerebellum.
So, when we talk about the cerebellum, we'll spend just a little bit of time
talking about this special division of the Cerebellum.
That is devoted to processing signals that are relayed along the eighth nerve,
as well as through the vestibular nuclei, concerning our sense of balance and
equilibrium. Now one of the major functions of our
vestibular nuclei in the lateral tegmentum of the brain stem Is to
coordinate the movements of the eyes so that we can maintain stable fixation
while our head and our body are in motion.
Now I want to talk just a bit about how this happens.
And this occurs via a reflex, a sensory motor reflex.
Called the vestibulo-occular reflex. So, before I can talk about this reflex,
I just want to make sure you're aware of the six pairs of extra-ocular muscles
that move the eyes in the orbit. there's the lateral rectus muscle which
abducts or abducts the eye. There is the medial rectus muscle which
adducts, or abducts the eye. The eye is elevated by the actions of the
superior rectus, as well as the inferior oblique muscle.
The eye is depressed by the actions of the inferior rectus and the superior
oblique muscle. And combinations of activation of these
muscles allow for all the other possible motions of the eye within the orbit.
So, there are six pairs of muscles, that attach to the sclera of each eye.
And these six muscles are under the control of three cranial nerves.
Those cranial nerves are the abducens nerve.
The abducens nerve is cranial nerve six. And it grows out from the abducens
nucleus, which is a somatic motor nucleus in the caudal part of the pons.
The sixth cranial nerve innervates the lateral rectus muscle.
Now moving up into the brainstem, near the junction of the pons and the midbrain,
we have our next somatic motor nucleus for eye control and that is the trochlear
nucleus. So the trochlear nucleus is found along
the dorsal mid-line in the tegmentum. But now, in the upper portion of the
pans, and this is a bit of an unusual nucleus because it grows its axon to exit
the dorsal aspect of the brain stem. And as it's exiting, it actually crosses
the midline. And innervates the contra-lateral superior
oblique muscle. Now, this is pretty unusual.
in fact it's a very unusual motor nerve in two respects: it's the only motor
nerve that exits the dorsal side of the central nervous system and it's the only
motor nerve that supplies innervation to contralateral muscle.
Okay, so the abducens nerve, nerve six that's the lateral rectus, the trochlear
nerve, nerve four does the superior oblique muscle.
The rest of these extra-occular muscles are innervated by axons that grow out from
the occular motor nucleus in the mid brain.
And send their axons through the third cranial nerve.
So here's our occular motor nucleus up in the mid-brain.
Again, a somatic motor nucleus, so it's found along the dorsal midline of the
tegmentum, but now up into the midbrain. And these axons grow out and supply the
remaining muscles, the superior and inferior rectus muscles, the medial
rectus muscle, and the inferior oblique.