Okay, so I think we're ready to move on
from considering our conjugate eye movements to a discussion of our
disconjugate eye movements. [SOUND].
And what we have in mind here are called vergence eye movements and there are two
varieties of vergence eye movements. There's convergence and then there's
divergence. So, imagine the situation where you are
changing your fixation from some point at distance away from you towards a near
point so maybe you're [SOUND] looking off in the distance and you decide now to
hold up your finger and look at what might be on the end of your finger.
When you do that you're changing fixation from let's call it point b to point a.
[SOUND] And such a change in fixation is going to involve a rightward rotation of
your left eye. And a leftward rotation of your right
eye. So both eyes are in AD-duction,
adduction. And so this is activity that's driven by
the ocular motor nerve causing contraction of the medial rectus muscles
in both orbits. And so that's what's necessary to go to a
near point of fixation. Now, if one was going to go from that
near point of fixation to a distant target, divergence is necesary.
So divergence is going to cause the left eye to rotate to the left and the right
eye to rotate to the right. This will bring our point of fixation
from point a out to something distant target, point c.
Okay, so going from near to far involves divergence.
So, you can imagine that there is likely to be a different kind of circuitry
involved with different kinds of internuclear connections.
That allow for the coordination of the activation of the medial rectus and
lateral rectus muscles as we go from a near target to a far target.
So, how are such movements organized by the nervous system?
Well, we won't answer in-depth for all kinds of eye movements.
But I do want to give you a bit of a feel for the organization of circuitry that
helps to coordinate the output of our brain stem ocular motor nuclei to govern
these six pairs of extra ocular muscles. And I want us to consider, really, two
aspects of the challenge of moving our eyes.
One is to produce the correct amplitude of movement, and the other, to move the
eyes in the appropriate direction for whatever the challenge might be.
So concerning amplitude, the amplitude of movement, of the eyes, is encoded in the
rate and duration of activity in the appropriate alpha motor neurons.
So this is illustrated, in the panel here to the left.
So imagine that we want to shift our eye position from let's say more or less
straight in front of us, off to the left. Well, for the left eye, let's call this
the left eye that's going to require activation of our lateral rectus muscle.
So the lateral rectus muscle is going to contract and that's going to allow the
eye to rotate towards the left or to AB-duct, to abduct.
Okay? So now if we are recording from the alpha
motor neurons and innervate that lateral rectus muscle, what we find is that these
motor neurons start firing action potentials just as we're beginning to
actually contract that lateral erectus muscle.
And very soon after the onset of contraction, within just a few
milliseconds, there is an adjustment in eye position.
Now, if we're just making a very small deviation from our neutral resting
position, then that motor neuron might go quiet again.
But if we want to continue to move further and further out to our left, we
will need to induce another burst of action potentials in this abducens motor
neuron that's going to cause this eye to deviate even further.
And now, if we get beyond some critical distance where we actually need to, pull
our eye in order to keep fixation at that particular angle, relative to the neutral
position of our orbit, there may be some ongoing activity in that abducens motor
neuron. Let's say we now make a far extreme eye
movement. Abduction, moving our eye out far to the
left. Now another barrage of action potentials
is needed. But so will a higher rate of sustained
activity in order to keep that eye pulled off to the left.
We need to contract that lateral rectus muscle in order to prevent the eye from
being pulled back, or relaxing back to this neutral position.
Now notice what happens if we were to make a eye movement back in the opposite
direction, in the direction of adduction, towards the midline.
This abducens motor nucleus neuron will go silent during that period.
And this reflects the activity of some kind of interneuron that will suppress
the activity of this abducens alpha motor neuron.
In this way, the signals that are coordinated between the motor neurons
that adduct the eye and abduct the eye can be coordinated.
And they can work in synergy with one another.
So when the eye is AD-ducted, adducted, the abducens neurons fall silent and vice
versa for the ocular motor neurons that innervate the medial rectus muscle.
Now what about direction of movement? Well, direction of movement can be a
challenge in various ways because objects of interest that we might want to look at
can happen really in any position relative to our head and our frame of
reference. So we need the ability to integrate
signals that will allow us to direct our eyes towards any location in the visual
world. And so part of the solution to this
challenge of directing our, our gaze at an object of interest has to do with the
biomechanics of the extra ocular muscles. So, we have the six pairs of extra ocular
muscles that have particular actions. They rotate the eye around particular
axis of rotation. Part of this challenge is solved by
simply coordinating the appropriate pairs of extra-ocular muscles.
So the direction of motion then, is specified by which pairs of extra-ocular
muscles are activated. These muscles are coordinated by circuits
of inter neurons that are found in the core of the brain stem.
In this structure that we've been talking about from time to time, as the brain
stem reticular formation. Well, as I've said elsewhere, the
reticular formation really isn't one structure, it's really a large collection
of circuits. And there are a couple of circuits that I
would highlight here. And these are circuits that coordinate
the horizontal movements of the eyes and the vertical movements of the eyes.
And what's illustrated in figure 20.8 is the circuitry that coordinates the
horizontal movements of the eyes. And that circuitry in the reticular
formation is known as the PPRF. And that stands for Paramedian Pontine
Reticular Formation. And one way to think about this circuit
is a set of interneurons that are integrating signals that may be command
signals from other motor structures or they may be sensory signals.
And the output of this circuitry of this interneurons is to coordinate the
appropriate firing of abducens motor nucleus neurons and ocular motor nucleus
neurons that govern the lateral and medial rectus muscles respectively, so
that our eyes can move in a conjugate fashion along the horizon.
Okay. Well, suppose I want to look off to my
right. imagine I'm just going to look to see if
someone's over there or maybe to see what time it is on a clock on the wall.
that's going to require the abduction of the right eye moving out laterally away
from the mid line and the abduction or the adduction of the left eye.
For the right eye, the lateral rectus muscle needs to contract for the left eye
the medial rectus muscle needs to contract.
Well here's the circuitry in the brain stem that makes this possible.
I want to look towards the right, so there are circuits in this right
paramedian pontine reticular formation that will drive the output from the right
[UNKNOWN] nucleus. And that's going to cause the contraction
of the right lateral rectus muscle. There will also be an internuclear neuron
that will cross the midline and supply the appropriate alpha motor neuron in the
contralateral ocular motor nucleus. That motor neuron, then, will fire away
and cause contraction of the left medial rectus, allowing me to turn both eyes to
the right in a conjugate way. So, again, this paramedian pontine
reticular formation is what we call the horizontal gaze center.
Now, not illustrated here is another gaze center that's actually present up here in
the midbrain. And it's a gaze center that coordinates
vertical eye movements. Okay?
And we simply call this the vertical gaze center.
And like the paramedian pontine reticular formation, the vertical gaze center is a
network of interneurons that will coordinate the output of the appropriate
motor neurons in the ocular motor nuclei that are governing superior and inferior
rectus muscles. And there's probably also some input to
the [UNKNOWN] nuclei to govern the superior oblique, as well as to the alpha
motor neurons in the occular motor complex that govern the inferior oblique
muscles. Those four pairs of muscles together are
responsible for moving the eyes upward and downward.