But now, what I'd like to do is to turn
our attention to the large-scale events that account for the structure of the
adult brain, as now you've come to understand it.
As we've worked through the early units of this course.
So, how is it that we can go from a simple tube to this marvelous structure
that you've now come to appreciate as the adult form of the human brain?
It's hard to look at this, is it not, and imagine that at some early stage in
development this brain was a simple tube? But, indeed, that's the case.
So, what I'd like for you to be able to do, is to reflect upon what you know
about the anatomy of the adult form of the human brain, and relate it back to
the more simpler forms that are produced in embryonic life.
Okay, well to get there, let's just look at the development of the brain and the
spinal cord in the very broadest terms as if we were looking at this from a fairly
macroscopic perspective. Well, what I'd like to show you are a
series of illustrations that show the various transformations of, of regions of
that neural tube, that give rise to specific parts of that adult human brain
that you now know something about. Well, over to the right, we have a
illustration, in schematic form, of our neural tube.
And so it's a fairly simple representation of that tube, but we"re
really only showing the anterior end of that tube.
To the left, we have a picture of the developing embryo.
So, here is the embryo, at a fairly early stage in development, probably about four
weeks or so, five weeks. And what we find here Is that the
developing embryo has a shape that looks something like a, like a cane as our
textbook describes. I hope you're not offended by that.
This is vertebrate life after all, and a representation of, of human life.
But what we find is a shape that reflects some morphegenic events, that begin to
take place, in the anterior end of this developing neural tube.
What I mean by morphogenic events, is the differential proliferation of cells, that
cause this simple neural tube to begin to, to bulge in certain places, to bend
in others, or to constrict. And, what we find is the formation of
essentially three principle enlargements, in the anterior end of this neural tube.
the most anterior of these enlargements we call the prosencephalon.
So the prosencephalon can be found here, at the anterior end of the neural tube.
And if we see this cane-like shape it's, it's at the end of the handle of the
cane, so right in this region. And this prosencephalon is what will go
on to form the cerebrum, the hemispheres of the brain.
So it's the front brain, the first brain. That's why we call it the prosencephalon.
So just behind the prosencephalon, we have the middle of these three swellings,
and we call that the mesencephalon, which means middle brain.
So this middle brain will go on to form what we call the midbrain.
And then lastly, the third of these swellings just caudal or towards the
tail. behind the mesencephalon is called the
rhombencephalon. And the rhombencephalon is what we call
the hind brain. So the rhombencephalon would be this
relatively extended straight part at the top of the cane-like shape of this
developing embryo. And then caudal or posterior to the
rhombencephalon, we have the spinal cord which will, will take shape.
So these three principle divisions go on in development.
And, they begin to further subdivide, specifically the prosencephalon and the
rhombencephalon. So the prosencephalon begins to divide
into two principal divisions, a diencephalon and a telencephalon.
The telencephalon will begin to form these large vesicles that will continue
to expand and dominate the developing nervous system.
So, these telencephalic vesicle are what will give rise to the cerebral
hemispheres. The diencephalon, meanwhile, undergoes
its own interesting changes. The diencephalon will begin to form these
outpockets that we call the optic vesicles.
And the optic vesicle is what will go out to form the neural elements of the eyes,
specifically the retina. And of course, as I mentioned when we
studied the visual system, the retina can therefore be seen as, really a part of
the brain. And the connection between the retina,
and the rest of the diencephalon, really reflects its embryological history.
This is why the optic nerve is myelinated by oligodendrocytes, the glial cell that
makes myelin in the central nervous system.
And this why, in one perspective, we might argue that the optic nerve really
isn't a nerve at all. It's an extension of the brain.
Okay, well, let's move on and consider briefly what happens to the
mesencephalon. So the mesencephalon is that middle
brain. This is the division of the developing
neural tube that seems to not change so much relative to the others.
It doesn't necessarily increase in size proportionately.
nor does it differentiate or subdivide any further in any significant way.
So just caudal to that mesencephalon then is the hind brain, the rhombencephalon.
And the rhombencephalon actually does begin to show some interesting
differentiations. there begins to be a bend at the top of
that cane-like handle, and that we call the pontine flexure.
And this flexure begins to differentiate two principle components of the
rhombencephalon. In the more rostral direction, we have a
metencephalon. And then, more caudally, just posterior
to this flexure is the myelencephalon. So the metencephalon is what will go on
to form the pons and the entire cerebellum.
The myelencephalon will form the medulla oblongata.
So let's advance one more stage in embryo genesis.
So now we're well into the second trimester of gestation.
And we begin to see a nervous system that resembles what you've come to appreciate
in the adult form. So, the view of the developing brain, at
this point, is obviously dominated by the cerebral hemispheres.
So this is, of course, the telencephalon. And if we were to look at this forebrain
in cross section, what we would see is, not only an outer cortex developing in
this telencephalic vesicle. But also, we would see deep gray matter.
And that deep gray matter, of course, is the basal ganglia.
Well, not seen from the outside, but present and visible in cross section, is
that derivative of the prosencephalon that is immediately caudal to the
telencephalon. And what I'm referring to of course, is
the diencephalon. And that diencephalon is beginning to
differentiate, into a thalamus, which is found more dorsal.
And then not seen at this level, more ventral, and a little bit anterior, would
be the hypothalamus. So from the diencephalon, we get the
thalamus and the hypothalamus. And then if we looked a little bit
deeper, also not shown in this particular cross-section, we would see the
mesencephalon. Which is now completely dwarfed by the
expansion of the prosencephalon and to the telencephalon and the diancephalon.
And just caudal to that mesencephalon, we would see, next, the derivatives of the
rhombencephalon, or the hind brain. And those derivatives would be most
obviously the cerebellum, and that portion of the brain stem to which it's
most intimately connected, and that would be the pons.
Together the pons and the cerebellum then are the metencephalon.
And then we would begin to see a nicely shaped myelencephalon, which is a
transitional region between divisions of the brain stem, and the upper segments of
the spinal cord. Which is, of course, what then extends
down the vertebral column of the developing fetus.
Well, what I'd like for you to be able to do is, to tell this story of the major
events that shape the formation of the brain.
And to be able to relate the adult brain structures, that you've now come to
recognize and know something about their structure and their physiology.
I want you to be able to relate those derivatives back to the embryonic brain.
And I want you to include in that discussion the associated ventricular
spaces. So, hopefully, as we begin to put
together your understanding of the anatomy of the human nervous system this
embryological framework will actually come to help you.
So, for example, if you are looking at a cross section through the brain and
you're not quite sure what you're looking at, perhaps you will remember that what
you're seeing near the dorsal aspect of the cross section is actually a very
narrow channel, allowing for the flow of cerebral spinal fluid from the third to
the fourth ventricle. You may recall that that's the cerebral
aqueduct. And that would be a hallmark of the
midbrain. So seeing the cerebral aqueduct is one
way to identify what kind of section through the brain stem you might be
inspecting. Well, having an understanding of
embryogenesis helps you appreciate why the lateral ventricles show up where they
do. The lateral ventricles are present both
along the dorsal aspect of the brain, but also down into the temporal lobe, and
even extending back into the occipital lobe.
And, the development of the temporal lobe is an important aspect of human brain
development. And, I think what you have come to
appreciate is that there are certain structures, in addition to the lateral
ventricle, such as the caudate nucleus. A component of the basal ganglia, that
are pulled down and anteriorly into that developing temporal lobe.
So, having this embryological framework. Knowing where things came from, can be a
great aide to you in understanding your appreciation, your perspective of human
brain anatomy. Well, if you've not done so yet, I would
encourage you to view my brief tutorial on the embryological divisions of the
human brain. And, to use this chart as a way to
reflect upon what you're seeing, as that video tutorial brings you back to the
lab. And shows you the human brain and allows
you to recognize the various subdivisions that I've been talking about, as they
actually present in an adult brain specimen.
So, if you've not done so, go ahead and do that at this point.
And, we'll resume our discussion in this tutorial, after you've had a bit of
reinforcement of your ability to recognize human brain anatomy in the
adult form. And be able to relate that back to the
embryological origins.