Hi everyone.
Welcome to this tutorial on the general principles of sensory systems.
We are at a bit of a pivot point in the course where our focus has been on gross
brain anatomy. As well as the principles of
neurophysiology that underline neural signaling and even a discussion of
neuroplasticity. Now we're going to begin to bring these
concepts together. On the one hand, the discussion of
anatomy, in the other, the discussion of cellular physiology and we want to bring
them together. As we discuss the organization and
function of our sensory motor systems. So this is the beginning of that pivot
and what I'd like for you to be able to focus on in this tutorial are some of the
general principles that will help us understand the organization of our
sensory systems which is what we'll discuss first and then we'll move on and
discuss the motor systems. So this topic pertains once again to our
key concept or foundational core concept in the field of neuroscience pertaining
to the complexity of the brain. And this tutorial I trust will help break
down some of that complexity for you as we consider how sensory systems are
organized, and how they function. And this will allow us to maybe reflect
for just a moment on this incredible capacity we have to explore our world.
Even the world with inside our own brain. You know, I'm reminded of a student I
once had some years ago who I will not name in case you're out there somewhere
but he showed up one day to the lab and he said, you know I just don't think the
brain should be allowed to study itself. And I thought, what a profound
observation you know, the kidney doesn't get to study itself nor does the liver,
but somehow the brain has the credentials that allow it to study itself.
And I think that is an interesting thought to consider.
Well let's move on and consider what we have to learn from this tutorial today.
So I have several learning objectives for you, I want you to be able to account for
the generation of action potentials in peripheral axons in response to somatic
sensory information. Now, the somatic sensory system will be
the first of the sensory systems that we consider, so I thinks it's useful to see
how this general problem of action potential generation in a sensory system
is realized in this one domain of sensation, that of somatic sensation.
I want you to be able to account for differences in mechanosensory
discrimination across the surface of the body.
Again, we're going to take somatic sensation as our model paradigm, but the
basic principles will apply to our other sensory systems as well.
And I want to consider in fairly general and broad terms, how information is coded
in the nervous system. So, I'd hope that you'd be able to have a
discussion of the important factors that influence information coding.
And one very important concept in sensory physiology is that of the receptive
field. So I want you to have a thorough
understanding of what the receptive field is.
And one way to ensure yourself of that is to have a discussion with someone about
it. Okay, what I'd like to do next is to
consider some general organizational principles that will apply to our
consideration of our sensory systems. And we'll see how they played out
specifically in different systems over the next several tutorials, but today I'd
like to keep it fairly general. So let's begin with one principal, and
that is the principle of neuronal pathways.
So let me illustrate for you, in very simple terms, what I mean by a neuronal
pathway. Let's imagine that there's some kind of
sensory surface out here perhaps this is the skin.
And the skin is innervated by nerve fibers and those nerve fibers are grown
by cells in this case cells that reside in the dorsal root ganglion so an axon
extends out and there's some kind of specialized receptor structure as the
axons reaches the skin surface. So this is what we call the peripheral
axon of this neuron. So this neuron can be considered a first
order neuron in this pathway. Well there is a central process that
enters the nervous system. So let's say this is now into the central
nervous system. And that first order neuron synapses on a
second order neuron. And that second order neuron projects
some distance through the central nervous system.to typically a third neuron.
We'll call that a third order neuron. And then, that third order neuron
provides input to a vast network of interconnected cells.
And some processing station within the brain, perhaps this processing station is
the cerebral cortex. So, we might have some, some complicated
network that allows all this to function. So we might call this now the cortex.
So the neural pathway would be the first order neuron, the second order neuron,
the third order neuron and then once we get into our complex network that is
being modulating by this ascending input, we sort of give up on our numbering
scheme. So, we'll see how that works?
But the pathway, in essence, is a series of neurons that are connected.
But the pathway is essentially a set of neurons that are connected in a serial
fashion. And this allows neurosignals to be
generated at some receptor surface and then be transmitted into the nervous
system ultimately to be processed at the level of the cerebral cortex.
Now, I drew this pathway in the horizontal dimension across the screen
just to make use of the space that I have, but I want to make an important
point about how we talk about our pathways in the brain.
So, let me clear that and redraw this in the vertical dimension.
So often we have some receptor connected to our first order neuron, which projects
to a second order neuron. But now we often think about this as
ascending into the nervous system and here's our complicated network again
representing the cerebral cortex. So here's our first order neuron, our
second order neuron, our third order neuron and then the cortex.
Now, this we might consider to be a sensory pathway and the information is
essentially flowing in the ascending direction.
Well, this cortical network also has a motor component to it where these sensory
signals are eventually integrated within some kind of a network that coordinates
and produces an output. And that output eventually reaches our
motor neurons and behaviors result. So we can imagine that there's some
output neuron here that is going to grow an axon which will probably synapse on
some kind of local circuit cell. That modulates the output of a series of
neurons that ultimately supply some kind of defector such as a skeletal muscle.
So this now is an output pathway which can be conceptualized as descending.
From a higher level from the cerebral cortex for example, down to a lower level
maybe in the spinal cord where we have a motor neuron leading to the contraction
of a skeletal muscle. Okay, so pathways can be either ascending
or descending. Ascending typically implies a sensory
function, descending implies a motor function.
In our nervous systems that are bilaterally symmetrical there's a very
interesting principle of organization in play, and that that is a principle of
contralateral representation. So, let me illustrate that for you.
Imagine that we have some body part in question here, maybe it's an upper
extremity, and that upper extremity is going to be represented in the
contralateral, or the opposite side, of the cerebral hemisphere.
So this is the cortex, let's say this is the post central gyrus, which is where we
find our somatic sensory cortex. So this body part will find its
representation in the somatic sensory cortex, something like this.
Now, contralateral representation implies that there must be some sort of crossing
of the midline. Somehow this information has to get from
one side of the body to the other in order for the ascending sensory pathway
to relay it to the appropriate processing station at the level of the cortex.
So as we work through our studies of our sensory pathways, please pay attention to
this issue of decussations. So decussations simply means midline
crossing. So we're talking about where in the
nervous system does this pathway cross the mid-line?
So that the principle of contralateral representation can be understood.
Now this is not just an academic exercise for future clinicians, this is a critical
point. One of your challenges in the examination
of your patients will be to understand, to have a mental model of what's wrong
with the nervous system. There may be a focal lesion somewhere in
this nervous system. And understanding where sensory and motor
pathways cross the midline, will be critical for your proper understanding of
what level of the nervous system has been impaired.
Now this issues of decussation, it's not just for sensory systems, it's also for
motor systems. Now if we get just in front of the post
central gyrus, we may be in the pre central gyrus which is where we have our
motor control networks and there may be a neuron there in the pre central gyrus
that gives rise to a descending axon. And that descending axon has to confront
the same challenge of contralateral representation.
At some point, there has to be a crossing of the midline, a decussation and as it
turns out the decussations. For sensory and motor pathways, are not
in exactly the same place. Even within our somatic sensory systems,
different pathways cross the midline at different locations.
And that will be critical for understanding the neurological signs and
symptoms of injury and disease, that you may observe in your patients.
Now let's turn to a new topic, the topic of sensory transduction.
By sensory transduction what I mean is the process that allows for the energy
that's present in the environment. Either in physical or chemical form, to
be converted into electrical signals within nerve cells.
And sensory transduction is a problem for each of the sensory systems that must be
solved in some ingenious way. And in fact it often is and many times
there are highly conserved mechanisms that are employed across animals with
nervous systems, including us. And sometimes those methods seem quite
surprising. so I hope you have some fun discovering
how sensory transduction works in each of the sensory systems that we will consider
in this course. Let's consider one example from the
somatic sensory system. Well, we know that the somatic sensory
system is concerned with Touch with physical contact is one modality of
stimulation. And it must happen that physical contact
leads to the generation of eletrical signals.
So, sensory transduction would be part of that story in addressing the question,
well. How does this mechanical contact lead to
the generation of electrical signals? Here's how this works for the receptors
that are sensitive to mechanical deformation of the body surfaces.
Imagine that we have some kind of receptor ending at the end of our first
order neuron This happens to be a beautifully laminated structure called a
Pacinian corpuscle. And this Pacinian corpuscle contains a
nerve ending that has cations selected channels.
And these ion channels are sensitive to stretching forces that are applied to the
membrane. So when there's some kind of mechanical
interaction with the structures containing these pacinian corpuscles,
these ion channels will open. Not because they're voltage gated or
because they are activated upon by neurotransmitters as we saw in our
previous tutorials on neuro signalling. But rather, because the mechanical forces
open these channels, so here's what we observe.
When a physical force is applied to this tissue, these ion channels will open,
this will allow our cations to enter. In this particular case, the principal
permiant ion is a sodium ion. And so, as I think should now be familiar
to you, as sodium rushes in to a neuronal cell it carries with it its positive
charge. And that leads to the depolarization of
the sensory ending of this axon. Let's have a physiological perspective on
this process now. Imagine that a fairly weak stimulus is
applied. And that weak stimulus will lead to the
influx of relatively small number of sodium ions.
So one can imagine a fairly weak depolarization of this receptor.
Now, we have a term that we use to apply this kind of depolarization.
We call this a receptor potential, because we're talking about a change in
membrane potential, in a receptor ending, of a primary sensory axon.
Now, if the strength of this stimulus is increased, what we would expect to see
has a greater response and indeed, that's what we see.
So with the stronger stimulus, we see an increase in the amplitude of this
receptor potential. But notice that, we don't yet generate an
electrical signal that can propagate, as long as this potential stays below
threshold, for generating an action potential.
But with a stronger stimulus, it very well may be that this receptor potential
is now sufficient magnitude to achieve the threshold for generating an action
potential. Once that threshold is achieved, an
action potential fires. Now notice what's going on here, the
generator potential is a function of the stretch activated ion channels.
But once that membrane is depolarized to achieve the threshold for generating an
action potential, now our friends the voltage gated sodium and potassium
channels are activated and an action potential is generated.
So different kinds of ion channels contribute in different phases to the
transmission of information along the axon of the primary sensory neuron.
Now in the case of our sub-threshold potential receptor potential that fail to
elicit an action potential. We're never going to know about that
contact through this sensory ending because there has been no action
potential. There's been no signal transmitted into
the central nervous system that requires a receptor potential of significant
amplitude to achieve threshold.