Ok well now that you've actually seen the
human brain in the lab. Let's look at some brains sections
through Silvius just to recap the structures that we've been viewing.
So what I've done is I've entered Silvius and selected sexual anatomy and
photographic atlas. And I think what we'll do is we'll start
in the coronal plain, so I'm going to simply tap on the coronal plain with the
selection of our thumbnail image. And let's now just walk through the brain
in the coronal plain, and I have selected the filter set that will colorize
components of the deep gray matter as we encounter them.
So, let's begin dissection about a few centimeters from the anterior pole of the
hemisphere and I just want you to notice that there is no deep gray matter a few
centimeters in to the brain. just to remind you that the basal ganglia
are set in towards the center of each hemisphere.
So if we section back now. another centimeter or two.
Now, we begin to see the basal ganglia as they're arranged around the very anterior
edge of the internal capsule. We call this the anterior limb.
Of the internal capsule. Now notice what we see.
In the red coloration, we have the Codate nucleus, which is on the medial side of
the internal capsule. And notice how the Codate nucleus bulges
outward towards the lateral ventricle. It forms the lateral wall of the body of
the lateral ventricle. Now on the lateral side of the internal
capsule we have the putamen and again notice it's lateral to the internal
capsule which is just starting to make it's appearance here.
And again we call this the interior limb of the internal capsule is the
exact[UNKNOWN] of streaming. From mainly the cortex that is in the
front part of the frontal lobe. Now, not labeled here in Sylvius although
we certainly could have here, would be the nucleus accumbens.
So let me just highlight that region of the nucleus accumbens.
It's basically the ventral part of the striatum.
Where the caudete nucleus and the putamen wrap around and come together just
inferior to this anterior limb of the internal capsule.
So this is roughly where we would find our nucleus accumbance.
Now that's one of those nice terms in Neuroanatomy that sort of tells you what
it, what it means. this nucleus accumbance is recumbent or
reclining upon the septom, which is this medial structure, that divides the walls
of the lateral ventricle and, and the inferior part of the posterior frontal
lobe. So the nucleus accumbens is the nucleus
that's lying down on the septum. Okay, let's go back a section, and at
some point, we expect to find the globus pallidus, do we not?
And indeed, we see it here, so the globus pallidus is found in green and it, like
the putamen, is lateral to these axons of the internal capsule.
So here's the internal capsule, so again we have globus pallidus, and putamen,
that are found lateral to the internal capsule.
And on the medial side we have the collated nucleus.
Now, if I can draw your attention towards the center of the section, you'll see,
deep into the lateral ventricles, there's some gray matter, that seems to be
sticking out at us. I'm referring to these two bulges right
there, and right there. Well, hopefully you might have in your
mind that, perhaps that's the thalamus. It's medial, it's on the medial side of
the internal capsule, it's a little bit posterior.
A little bit set back from the large part of the basal ganglia, and indeed that's
going to be the thalamus, that we will see as we cut through to our next
section. So now, what we find is all the three
major components of the basal ganglia that we saw in the last section, caudate
nucleus on the medial side of the internal capsule.
the putamen, getting smaller but it's still present.
And the globus pallidus, also present but getting smaller.
And just to be more clear, here's our internal capsule.
Now we're getting from the anterior limb into what we call the posterior limb of
the internal capsule. And one hallmark of getting into the
posterior limb of the internal capsule, is the development of the thalamus on the
medial side of the internal capsule. Just in inferior and medial to the
caudate nucleus. So this is the thalamus. [SOUND]. The region just inferior and anterior to
the thalamus is where we would find the hypothalamus. [SOUND]. Hypo suggesting.
Below or inferior to the thalamus and indeed that's where we find it.
You maybe wondering about the structure that is is colorized yellow here.
This is the amygdala the amygdala is sometimes considered part of the
basogaglia but I think it's probably most helpful to you.
not to consider it part of the basal ganglia, even though it's included here,
and Sylvias under our basal ganglia module for historical reasons.
But as we'll get to talk more about the amygdala, you'll see that its functions
can largely be differentiated from those that pertain to the basal ganglia.
Although for the efficienatos out there who may be studying the basal ganglia and
the amygdala, you know that from a different perspective they do indeed have
uh,many embryological, histological, and physiological features in common.
Well that's a subject for a more detailed course at some other time.
But for our purposes let's consider the amygdala separate from the rest of the
basal ganglia. Well, just for completeness we'll go back
on more section. And what we'll see now is that we are
behind now or posterior to the putamen, the globus pallidus, we still have a
little bit of cardea nucleus right, because the cardea nucleus is curving
around. And we actually see some of it in the
temporal lobe just on the dorsal margin of the temporal horn of the lateral
ventricle. And that's because this cardea nucleus.
Forms this c shaped structure with a long tail that extends into the tempral lobe.
S the cut that we've made shows the cardea nucleus in two locations within
each hemisphere. Alright now let's go through the same
experience only now in the axial plane. So, let's section down, from above.
And, if we enter the hemisphere, a few centimeters, below the dorsal aspect of
the hemisphere, we are clear above the basal ganglion, so what we see is simply
cortex, and the white matter at the center of the hemisphere If we go in one
more section. Now, I think it's very clear that the
caudate nucleus is on the medial side of the internal capsule.
So, here's the caudate nucleus. And what we see is mainly the posterior
head, and the body of the caudate nucleus.
once again, we see, the thalamus peeking out at us.
From the medial side of the internal capsule but set back into the lateral
ventricle. You may be wondering where the internal
capsule is on this view. The internal capsule is going to come
through this white matter in this region, just on the lateral edge of the caudate
nucleus. 'Kay, so let's go down one more section,
and now we see our three major components of the basal ganglia that we've been
featuring in this part of the tutorial. We have the head of the caudate nucleus,
and a little bit of the tail, we have the putamen, which is shown here in blue.
And we have the globus pallidus, which is colorized here in green.
Now the thalamus is located in this region right back there.
Okay, now, I realize it's a bit difficult to appreciate the internal capsule here,
but this is an important view of the internal capsule.
It's running between the head of the caudate nucleus and the putamen and the
globus paladus and it's also separating the globus paletus, the putamen and the
thalamus. And you'll notice how I'm highligting
this internal capsule here. I'm doing it in a way that hopefully
brings to light the posterior and the anterior limbs of the internal capsule.
So this is the posterior limb of the internal capsule and this would be the
anterior limb of the internal capsule. And you may also notice there's a little
wisp of white matter that is running right between the two hemispheres in that
location. That has nothing to do with the internal
capsule. That's actually at a more inferior
position. This is the anterior commissure.
One of those great commissures. That inter-connects grey matter
structures in the cerebral cortex. Okay, so I want you to appreciate now the
layout of this deep grey matter relative to this internal capsule because in this
one axial slice we see all the important relations that I want you to understand.
The globus pallidus and then the putamen are lateral to the capsule, and the
caudate nucleus and the thalamus are medial, with the caudate nucleus on the
medial side of the anterior limb of the capsule.
And the thalamus on the medial side of the posterior limb of the internal
capsule. Okay, well I hope you will have a chance
to, exercise your knowledge, of this deep gray matter.
one way that I would recommend that you do it, is now on your own, if you have a
copy of Sylvius, enter our MRI atlas, this is a T1 weighted MRI atlas, of the
human brain. And rather than colorizing the brain
we've place these small little dots on the brain.
And if you select a dot, you will see, opportunity to identify the structure
that's labeled. If you click on that structure, now
there's information available in a text field over here to the right.
So what I would invite you to do if you have Sylvius is to section through the
brain. And since this is a MR study of a human
brain. We have a much greater density of images.
And I think that would be of benefit to you.
And I hope you can recognize in this T1 weighted image.
Many of the structures that we saw on the lab.
In a fresh human brain, and also in Sylvius and what I would invite you to do
is to walk through and make sure you can recognize the structures.
Not based on how well you can interpret an MR scan, but rather based on your
conceptual knowledge of where you expect to find deep gray matter.
Relative to the internal capsule and the other important features of the interior
of the hemisphere. Okay, well, with a little practice, I'm
quite confident that you can acquire these competencies and you will very
quickly be navigating your way through sections of the human brain.