So so far, we've been talking about the
operation of the stretch reflex under pretty much one set of circumstances.
But there may be a variety of circumstances that would demand a change
in the sensitivity of these receptors. So, it makes sense that there ought to be
some way to change the sensitivity of these receptors even during an active
movement. And this is where the input from the
gamma motor neuron to the contractile elements of the intrafusal muscle fibers
comes in. So, let's consider how this works.
First of all, what do I mean by gain? What I mean by gain is simply this.
Gain is the amount of extrafusal muscle contraction that can be elicited by a
given stretch or a given load that's applied to that muscle.
So, it's basically an assessment of the output of the motor unit relative to the
input in the form of a sensory signal that is monitoring the length of the
muscle. So, if gain is low, then one can imagine
that a moderate stretch will induce only rather a modest output from the central
nervous system leading to only a small increase in resistance given a particular
low that's just been applied. If gain is high, then you can imagine
that the very same sensory stimulus will now illicit a much greater number of
action potentials in the motor output to the muscle that was stretched, and a much
larger increase in resistance given the very same sensory stimulus.
So, gain is a way of either dialing up or dialing down the volume, if you will, of
this stretch reflex circuitry. So, how is gain adjusted?
Gain is adjusted by the output of our gamma motor neurons to the contractile
elements of our intrafusal muscle fibers. So, one way that we can think of how this
works is that activating our gamma motor neurons resets the sensitivity of the
muscle spindle, and this would be especially important if the muscle is
actively contracting. Meaning, that the muscle spindle is
getting shorter. Well, if it gets shorter, then it loses
its sensitivity to monitor the change in muscle length.
So, let's look at this figure and see how this might actually work.
Now, for the purposes of this schematic we're taking the intrafusal muscle fibers
out of the muscle. of course, they're actually embedded
within the muscle but for this demonstration let's just simplify by
removing these intrafusal muscle fibers. And what we can see is now, is that if we
have a microelectrode that can stimulte the extrafusal muscle fibers, then this
muscle can contract against some load. And if we do nothing to the muscle
spindle, what we would see is that during the active contraction, the muscle
spindle would grow silent. And that's because there is shortening of
the muscle. And as the muscle shortens, then this
intrafusal muscle fiber becomes somewhat lax.
And that reduces the stretch that would be applied and reduces the sensory
outflow from that group IA or group II afferent that happens to be supplying
that muscle spindle. Now, let's imagine that we repeat this
experiment, only now, while we stimulate the alpha motor neuron, we also stimulate
the gamma motor neuron. So, here's the stimulation of the alpha
motor neuron and concurrent stimulation of the gamma.
So, notice what's happening here. As this muscle is contracting and getting
shorter, the activity recorded from this spindle afferent is filled in.
And so, this muscle spindle can remain sensitive to the dynamic aspects of
length change, even while that overall muscle length is getting shorter.
Now, these adjustments of gain, they can happen in lots of different contexts.
In fact, they're probably happening all the time and this can be highly adaptive
because we move in a variety of situations with a variety of goals in
mind. So, the adjustments of gain are very much
context-dependent. So, the gamma motor neuron activity can
be adjusted relatively independently from the excitability of the alpha motor
neurons. And this can largely be accomplished by
descending inputs that are coming down mainly from the brainstem.
We'll talk more about that in a subsequent tutorial.
But note that the gamma motor neurons are key to adjusting the sensitivity of the
muscle spindle. And that adjustment of sensitivity is
itself something that can be governed from above.
And you might imagine that this could be very important as we engage, for example,
in sport, or perhaps, as we're engaged in circumstances that require some sense of
fight or flight. We can imagine that an increase in muscle
spindle sensitivity is very good for generating explosive kinds of motor
activities. So, for example, imagine being a sprinter
on the blocks, ready to go when the starter pistol ignites.
So, we are ready, we're set. Well we imagine that the gain of our
muscle spindle system is probably increased during those moments of getting
ready and set. Because what, what we want to be able to
do is to monitor a change in muscle length that might happen during this
explosive outburst of motor activity that a sprinter would engage in as they exit
the block at the sound of the starter's pistol.
Well, that's just one example of how descending inputs can modulate the gain
of gamma motor neurons. These adjustments very well may rely on
descending inputs from the brainstem from parts of what we call the reticular
formation of the brainstem that generate and then release in the spinal cord
biogenic amine neurotransmitters. So, these are transmitters that we
consider to be neuromodulators, because they have the effect of either increasing
or decreasing the excitability of their post synaptic targets.
This is exactly what we might need if we're going to adjust the excitability of
our gamma motor neurons, depending upon context.
There is even evidence that suggest that the presynaptic terminals of our group 1A
afferents themselves are subject to synaptic inhibition.
And this would be a means of cutting off the incoming sensory signal independently
of whatever adjustment of gain we might employ at the level of the gamma motor
neuron. So, either by adjusting the sensitivity
of the spindle or perhaps interrupting the incoming sensory signals derived from
that spindle, we can make the overall sensitivity of this muscle spindle system
and its impact on the extrafusal muscle fiber, something that can be exquisitely
controlled. I think the power of gain control can be
easily demonstrated. if any of you are athletes or you
participate in stretching activities either before or after some sport or some
kind of activity involving exercise you may be wondering, well, how is it that we
can voluntary stretch? I mean, maybe some of you do yoga or
something like that. the fact that you can voluntarily stretch
a muscle implies that there must be some kind of way of adjusting the gain of
those muscle spindles because obviously you actually want to lengthen those
muscles. You don't want that spindle to contract
against your voluntary desire to lengthen that muscle.
So, that implies that their must be some descending control that will adjust
either the gain of the muscle spindle via changing the excitability of the gamma
motor neuron and/or interrupting the incoming afferent signal that's arriving
via that group IA or group II afferent in the spinal cord.
all of these considerations that we've been talking about so far pertaining to
the muscle spindle are really critical for maintaining muscle tone.
So, muscle tone is simply the resting level of tension in the skeletal muscle.
And this tension depends upon the firing rate of the alpha motor neurons that
supply the extrafusal fibers of that muscle.
The activity of those alpha motor neurons is what's regulated by the sensory
feedback that's coming from the muscle spindle.
And as we've already discussed, the gamma motor neuron then will be really critical
for adjusting the sensitivity of that muscle spindle.
And therefore, the sensory signal that is then impacting the output of the alpha
motor neurons and therefore the tone of the muscle.
You can imagine that if there is damage to the alpha motor neuron itself or the
axons in the ventral root of the spinal nerve, there should be a catastrophic
collapse of muscle tone. Because those muscle fibers not longer
are receiving their electrical signal from the central nervous system to
maintain their resting level of tension. One might also imagine that there would
be a catastrophic loss of muscle tone if there should be a disruption of the
incoming sensory signals via the dorsal root.
and that incoming sensory information is essential for maintaining the output of
those alpha motor neurons. So, damage either to the ventral horn,
the dorsal horn, the ventral root, or the dorsal root, or perhaps the spinal nerve
itself all could produce a catastrophic loss of muscle tone.
We call this hypotonia or sometimes, sometimes, we call the muscle itself
Flaccid to refer to this catastrophic loss of muscle tone.
Now we'll see in a future tutorial that if there is damage, not to this reflex
circuitry of the spinal cord but to the inputs that are arriving from higher
levels such as the brainstem or the motor cortex, one can eventually see exactly
the opposite response, a increase in muscle tone.
It's as if the gain of these segmental reflexes is turned up by a loss of
descending inputs. And this difference between saying loss
of muscle tone or an increase of muscle tone will be absolutely critical for your
assessment of the localization of injury based on an examination of skeletal
muscle and the status of our segmental stretch reflexes.