Welcome back to our discussion of the
mechanosensory systems which are part of our broader systems we have within our
bodies for processing somatosensory information.
All of this pertains to several foundational concepts in the field of
neuroscience. Two in particular that I would highlight
are, of course, our first one that should be very familiar to you now that the brain
is the body's most complex organ. And also, that there are genetically
determined circuits within the brain that are truly the foundation for the
operations of the nervous system. And so we're going to focus, in this
tutorial, on 1 such circuit. We'll call it a pathway.
It's a pathway that allows mechanosensory signals to get from our surfaces where
they're detected, such as our skin surfaces on the tips of our fingers, all
the way up to the appropriate processing stations in the cerebral cortex.
So, our learning objectives are for you to characterize and recognize, and you'll see
these pairs of terms played out across several distinct mechanosensory pathways.
First I'd like for you to be able to characterize the pathway known as, known
as the dorsal-column medial lemniscal system.
I'd like for you to be able to recognize components of this pathway when you
actually confront them in images of the central nervous system.
Be they views of the brain from the outside, histological sections through the
brain or the spinal cord, or some other conceptualization of elements of these
pathways. So here we're focusing on the
dorsal-column medial lemniscal system which is long term but very descriptive.
It tells you about one particular pathway. Another pathway is the corresponding
mechanosensory pathway for the face, and this runs through the trigeminal nerve.
And components of the trigeminal nuclear complex of the brain stem, so again I want
you to be able to characterize the pathway and recognize the elements when we
actually look inside the nervous system. And lastly I want to introduce you to a
pathway that gets mechanosensory feedback about the movements of the body into the
cerebellum. The cerebellum is a marvelous organ that
facilitates agility. Be it agility of bodily movement or
agility of thought and, and, we'll spend an entire set of tutorials thinking
together about the cerebellum. For tutorial, I want to introduce the
pathway. That gets information about movement from
the spinal cord into the cerebellum. And as usual, I want you to be able to
recognize components of that pathway, when you're confronted with them.
And the recognition part is really key in this tutorial and it will be key for the
rest of the course. Because I want you to begin to build up.
A mental model of the nervous system and being able to recognize the components as
they actually appear will be key for the success of your mental frame work or your
mental model so that way you can consider what happens when elements of that model
becomes damaged Or dysfunctional. And that will help you translate your
foundational knowledge in medical neuroscience to the care and treatment of
individuals with neurological injury and disease.
Well let me introduce again the pathways and then we'll look at them one at a time.
So for our conscious awareness of mechanosensory stimuli there are two
pairs of pathways, one for the body below the back of the head including the back of
the head. We call this the post-cranial body, "post"
meaning posterior to the cranium, and there is a pathway that we call the dorsal
column medial lemiscal system. It has elements of the dorsal columns of
the spinal cord and the medial lemniscus, an important pathway in the brain stem.
Now there's also a pathway that mediates pain and temperatures that we'll look at
in a separate tutorial for the post cranial body.
That pathway is called the anterolateral system.
I include it here for completeness. And now for the face we have a
corresponding pair of pathways. For mechanical, sensation, we have a
pathway that runs through the division of the trigeminal complex of the brain stem,
called the chief or principal sensory nucleus of the trigeminal complex, so that
will be a pathway for Mechano-sensation. For pain and temperature, there's a
pathway of the trigeminal nerve that runs through a different part of the trigeminal
brain stem. A subdivision of that complex called the
spinal trigeminal nucleus. Okay, well, let's begin by thinking
together about this pathway for the mechanical stimulation for the post
cranial body, called dorsal-column medial lemniscal system.
Now, we have a view of the entire pathway taken from our companion textbook and this
is probably really small on whatever size screen you're using to view this right
now. So let me just give you the broad overview
of this pathway and then we'll look at more magnified views of this figure so
that you can see things more clearly. Well, I'll make a few points in general
terms. This pathway from mechanosensation
involves three neurons. As we go from skin to cortex.
Okay? So I want you to focus on these three
neurons. I want you to consider where are their
cell bodies. I want you to consider the distribution of
their axons. And thirdly I want you to be able to
discuss and to illustrate the location of the synaptic connections from 1 axon to
the dendrites of another neuron in the serial pathway.
'Kay so, so three things to focus on in this pathway and all the others we'll look
at in the next few tutorials. That is the location of cell bodies, the
distribution of the axons of those cell bodies, and then the locations of the
synaptic junctions. So, let me just ask you, where would we
find cell bodies? Hopefully your answer is, well somewhere
in gray matter within the central nervous system or perhaps in a ganglion if we're
talking about something outside the central nervous system.
That's great if that was your answer. I might ask you where would we find axons?
Well hopefully you would say in the central nervous system we'd find axons in
white matter. And for the peripheral nervous system,
we'd find axons and nerves, also a great answer.
Well, what about synapses? Where would we find synapses?
Well, maybe just a little bit more thought about that leads you to answer, well, gray
matter. Synapses are the output zone of one
neuron, but it's also the input zone of another.
So we would find synapses in grey matter. Great.
Well, let's keep those thoughts in mind as we look at this pathway in some detail.
So, this paths, pathway begins with a first order neuron.
Which is a dorsal root ganglion neuron. Okay.
So here it is right there in the cervical enlargement of the spinal cord.
And here's the dorsal root ganglion in the lumbar enlargement of the spinal cord.
These are the first order neurons. So they have a peripheral process as we
saw in the last tutorial. Specialized to establish some labeled
lines some particular aspect in mechano-sensation.
And then the central process enters the spinal cord.
That central process enters the dorsal column and ascends, it runs the
longitudinal length of the spinal cord until we hit a set of nuclei on top of the
dorsal column and those nuclei exist in the caudal part of the medulla.
Specifically in the dorsal part of the tegmentum.
We call them dorsal column nuclei, or DCN for short.
That's what we have at this level. So that's where we find the synapses for
the next neuron in the pathway, so those neurons then grow axons that do something
really important. They cross the mid-line and as they do
they, establish the location of the decussation of this pathway.
So for every pathway we consider, we want to remember that for the cerebral
hemispheres there's a principle of contra-lateral representation that we must
solve. So in the case of the mechanosensory
pathway, contralateral representation is established in the caudal medulla with the
outgrowth of the second order axon. It sweeps across the tegmentum of the
medulla, and ascends the rest of the way through the brain stem.
And synapses on the next neuron in the pathway which is in the thalamus,
specifically the ventral posterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus and that's what we
have here, our third neuron. So the dorsal column nuclei was our second
order neuron, and our third order neuron is in the ventral posterior lateral
nucleus. So that's our third-order neuron.
And from there, the thalamic cells provide input on up to the post-central gyrus.
Once we reach the post-central gyrus, we basically abandon trying to order the
neurons, because we recognize that When the thalamus projects to the cortex we're
providing input to a vast network involving, hundreds a millions of neurons
that potentially could be modulated by this sensory stream.
So, at that point, given that scale, it just doesn't service well to continue the
numbering scheme that Has served us well along the pathway from skin up through the
thalamus. Alright, well, let's have a bit of a
closer look. And we'll focus in on the first-order
neuron making a connection to the second-order neuron.
So again, our first-order neuron is a dorsal-root ganglion cell.
Now we can see a little bit more clearly, I, I trust.
An important distinction between the afferents/g that arise in a cervical
enlargement and those that arise in the lumbar enlargement.
The first order axons from the lower part of the spinal cord enter the dorsal column
near the more medial aspect of. The dorsal column on one side of the
spinal cord. As we contribute axons from increasingly
superior directions, those axons add to the lateral aspect of that dorsal column.
Consequently, when we reach the cervical cord, the input, which is significant of
course, because we're talking about mechanosensory signals from the upper
extremity. They simply add to the lateral side to the
dorsal column. So there's a medial to lateral progression
as axons contribute. As a result of this progression in the
cervical spinal cord we recognize a division of the dorsal column into two
parts. There is a medial gracile tract, and a
lateral cuneate tract. We'll see them shortly in Sylvius.
These two pathways run the length of the spinal cord, the gracile tract runs the
entire length, the cuneate tract begins to form in the upper thoracic cord and then
runs on up through the entire cervical enlargement.
And these tracts meet a nucleus at the top of the column there was 1 nucleus on top
each tract there's a nucleus called the gracile nucleus that sits on top the
gracile tract and then a nucleus called the cuneate nucleus.
That sits on top of the cuneate, tract. Okay?
So that's where we find our first synapse in this pathway.
And the second order neuron, then, which is part of this dorsal column nuclear
complex grows an axon that sweeps across the mid-line.
And as these axons sweep across the mid-line, I'll just draw a bunch of them
here, we give that a particular name. We call that the internal arcuate fibers.
It's simply the second order axons as they cross the midline.
Now once they cross the midline, now they make a sharp turn.
And project in the superior direction. It's really the very same axons, OK.
We just give them different terms and different locations.
When they're crossing the mid-line, they're the internal arcuate fibers.
After they've crossed the mid-line, they form a distinctive medial ribbon of white
matter that we call the medial lemniscus, or ML for short.
We'll let's see the medial lemiscus as we blow up the top half of this figure from
our book. So now, we have an indication of at least
two axons that are ascending from the dorsal column nuclei To the ventral
posterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus, the vpl.
And it's this fiber bundle that we call the medial lemniscus.
Okay? So, again, these are second order axons.
They make synaptic connections in the thalamus.
In the vpl, in particular. And then, from there, the axons project
into the post central gyrus. And they do so in sematotopic order.
For example, the fiber that is projecting here into the para-central lobule is a
fiber that was activated by the gracile tract.
And that fiber Is communicating somatic sensory signals from the lower extremity.
The thalamic neuron from the VPL that terminates here near the middle of the
precentral gyrus is being driven by an axon that entered the spinal cord in the
cuneate tract. So this is an input that's being driven by
what we did with our contra-lateral arm or hand.
Okay. So the exquisite body map that we talked
about in the previous tutorial is established by the systematic ordering of
axons from the thalamus projecting into the precentral gyrus.
Okay, well I hope that was clear. I took some time to go through this quite
slowly. We won't take quite so much time as we
talk through the next two pathways.