Let's look anatomically for
just a moment, and consider the source of some of these biogenic amine
transmitters, beginning with dopamine. Well, I mentioned some of the places
where dopamine is released. Dopamine is derived from cells that have
their cell bodies here in the midbrain, which is at the very top of
the brain stem in a collection of compact cells known as
the substantia nigra pars compacta. And right adjacent to that is a region
called the ventral tegmental area. Here we have cells that
have their somata here and they send axons to important parts of
the brain, such as the basal ganglia, specifically the striatum which
is part of the basal ganglia. And from the ventral tegmental areas
projections into medial temporal lobe structures such as the amygdala,
as well as to this ventral and medial aspect of the prefrontal cortex. So dopamine is a very important
neuromodulator in all of these places. Here, just to highlight
a little bit of neuroanatomy, we have a cross-section through
the forebrain as illustrated in the upper-right of this slide,
shows you about where we're looking. And I want to draw your attention
to the center of this slice. You'll notice label number 11, here we have this dark substance,
which sits in the midbrain. And that dark substance is in fact
the substantia nigra, which of course, is Latin for dark substance. So here we've got the cell bodies
of the neurons that synthesize and release dopamine at some distance
of their axon terminals up in the basal ganglion and in the cortex. And in the medial part of this
region where we have dark substance, that's our ventral tegmental area. And that too, is a place where the cell
bodies of these neurons reside that send their axons up into structures
associated with the limbic forebrain and release dopamine there. Well, norepinephrine is another important
small molecule neurotransmitter, and norepinephrine is derived from cells who
have their home in the brain stem but now in the dorsal part of the pons in
a structure called the locus coeruleus. The locus coeruleus is another place
where we find black substance, or actually the locus
coeruleus means blue spot. If we are lucky enough
to cut a section through the tegmentum of the pons just right, we might see these two little spots that
look sort of a deepish grayish blue color. Those are the locations of where we
find our cell bodies of neurons that are producing norepinephrine and releasing
it in various places in the brain. Really just about
everywhere in the brain and even down into the spinal cord
do these cells grow their axons. So all of these biogenic means
have in common a limited number of cells whose cell bodies are in the
brain stem that grow axons that branch and grow profusely throughout
various parts of the forebrain, hindbrain, and even the spinal cord. One last example is the neurotransmitter,
serotonin. So serotonin comes form a group of cells that are found in a couple of
different places in the brain stem. They tend to be found
right along the midline in a group of nuclei that we call
the seam nuclei, or the Raphe nuclei. Raphe means seam, so right along a seam where the two sides
of the brian stem come together. That's where we find our cell bodies that
release serotonin and as I mentioned, serotonin's a very
important neuromodulator. Serotonin appears to be
a molecule that when out of proper physiological balance can
lead to various affective disorders. Many of our drugs that
we use to restore normal health with respect to
affective disorder act by selectively blocking the re-uptake
of serotonin, thereby increasing the synaptic concentrations of
that drug in important brain structures. Okay well,
there are more animations to view. If you care to see some summary,
some of the biochemistry, and some of the molecular
biology regarding the function of these
biogenic synaptic systems. I would encourage you to
view animation 6.3 and 6.5 that review the organization of
dopamine and serotonin serotonin synapses. Okay, at this point I think we're
ready to switch gears just a bit and talk about the neuropeptide
neurotransmitters. So as I mentioned, the neuropeptide
neurotransmitters are larger molecules. They're made of a number of amino acids
that are covalently bonded to small peptides. Sometimes they can be rather short or sometimes they can be
of considerable size. So, as you might imagine, these molecules must be handled somewhat
differently in the presynaptic terminal, and, indeed, they are, and
we'll come back to that in just a minute. But before we talk more about how they're
handled in the presynaptic terminal, let's just make a few points
about their physiology. So, the neuropeptides mediates slower and more long lasting effects than most of our
small molecule transmitters and that's because the neuropeptides seem to interact
with metabotropic types of receptors. And as we'll discuss these
are receptors that require cellular metabolism in order to mediate
their function, and all that takes time. So the neuropeptides mediate slower and
more long lasting synaptic effects, some of which can even go on for
hours to days, depending upon the downstream effects of
the metabolic pathways that are activated. Some of the important
neurotransmitters in this category include what's shown here in this slide. The enkephalins, so there are a number of
different enkephalins that are important. The enkephalins are opioids that have
henogesic effects in the brain and so these bind to receptors in various
places including the spinal cord. Other important peptide
transmitters are substance P, which is very important in
modulating the transmission of pain signals in the dorsal
horn of the spinal cord. And many of our hypotholamic releasing
hormones that are secreted into the porter circulation from the hypothalamus to
the anterior pituitary are neuropeptides. As are the hormones that are released
directly in the posterior pituitary into the blood stream from hypothomlamic
neurons that send their axons into the neurohypothesis. So these hypothalamic hormones
are other examples of neuropeptides. And lastly, let's consider the activities
of some neurotransmitters that are still relatively poorly understood,
and for that reason, we call them unconventional
neurotransmitters. Not because they are necessarily so
different from our small molecules and our peptides. In some cases they are, but
mainly because we don't yet have a full understanding of
their mechanisms of action. And so let's begin by talking about
the purinergic neurotransmitters. So these include our purines,
such as adenosine triphosphate. So you're all familiar with molecule from
your studies of cellular metabolism. You know that ATP is the energy
currency for cells, and what you may not have known
is that it actually has some biological activity at synapses
in the nervous system. So ATP can be co released with other
small molecule neurotransmitters. Once it's in the extracellular space, ATP
is typically metabolized into adenosine. And adenosine itself can have
it's own biological activity. Adenosine tends to bind
to various receptors, and these receptors have various functions
in different kinds of brain circuits. One important circuit where adenosine
is important is in the hypothalamus. And adenosine appears to build
up throughout our day and appears to be an important
trigger that leads to drowsiness. So, the more our cells in
the hypothalamus are consuming energy, the more adenosine builds up
in the extracellular fluids. That seems to be something like an index of our state of fatigue, and
the degree of which we require sleep. Well, one thing many of us do,
I myself am guilty of this, is that we fight this system by
consuming caffeinated beverages. And what these caffeinated beverages
do is they block adenosine receptors. So the xanthines including caffeine and
theophylline, they are blocking the receptors that are mediating this
natural sense of drowsiness that will, we think, in some way have a restorative
function on brain circuits. Another of the so called unconventional
neurotransmitters that's fairly recently been
discovered are a series of molecules that are derived from
membrane lipids called endocannabinoids. These molecules are hydrophobic, so when synthesized they can freely
diffuse across plasma membranes, and they bind to receptors that are also
bound by the psychoactive components of cannabis,
hence their their name endocannabinoids. So these include some very
interesting receptors, such as the CB1 receptor which is present in high concentrations in structures
associated with the brain's reward system. It's also present throughout
the cerebral cortex and in the cerebellum, in the basal ganglia. So lots of places where we
think that the drug of abuse, the cannabinoids derived from cannabis, have their effects on cognition and
sensory and motor function. So these endocannabinoids seem to
have some interesting physiological roles in modulating plasticity. Especially plasticity
at inhibitory synapses. And you can read more about that in
the textbook if you like and figure 6.19. We'll come back to this when we talk
about mechanisms of synaptic plasticity in a future tutorial. One final neurotransmitter
to discuss is nitric oxide. So this truly is an unconventional
neurotransmitter in that it's a gas. It's not a solute that can be
dissolved in an aqueous medium. It's not a peptide. But rather it's a gas. And nitric oxide is produced from
the metabolism of the amino acid arginine, as is illustrated here in this pathway. So arginine Is processed by an enzyme
called nitric oxide synthase, and nitric oxide in a gaseous form
is produced as is citrulline. And that nitric oxide then is free to
diffuse across the plasma membrane, or it can interact with target
structures maybe within the cell, where the gas was synthesized. Here in this particular illustration we're
showing the activation of a guanylyl cyclase enzyme, which results
in the production of cyclic GMP, one of the important second messenger
systems we have within the brain. Now, one of the interesting activities
of nitric oxide involves its ability to diffuse freely from, lets say
a postsynaptic cell to a presynaptic cell. So, there is ongoing interest in the idea
that nitric oxide might be some kind of a retrograde messenger that
allows from signals to travel back from a post synaptic
cell to a pre synaptic site. Of some interest is the activities
of nitric oxide as a vasal dialator. And so, this is a function that is
performed in a variety of of tissues, and that activity is mediated
by a guanylyl cyclase pathway. And perhaps it's of interest
to some of you that Viagra and other related drugs that are used to affect erectile dysfunction
function by affecting nitrous oxide mediated vasodialation. Similar pathways, however, are found in a
variety of structures within the brain and elsewhere in the nervous system. Hence these drugs can often have side
effects, often involve sensory processing and we'll see why when we talk about
the mechanisms of phototransduction. And we'll discover an important role for the guanylyl cyclase pathway within
the photo receptors of our retinas. OK, well let's look now at a side
by side comparison the processing of small molecule
transmitters and peptide transmitters. So I would encourage you to have a look
at the table that I've prepared for you, in page 3 of your handout,
which talks about the synthesis, the packaging release, and
the removal of neurotransmitter, at synapses that use small molecules and
peptide transmitters. So with respect to the synthesis,
small molecules are synthesized typically in the pre synaptic terminal where
there are enzymes that are present that can create the active neurotransmitter
right there in the presynaptic terminal. For peptide neurotransmitters,
the synthetic pathway is primarily in the cell body where the peptide is
processed like all other peptides. Through the endoplasmic reticulum,
thegGolgi apparatus, where various kinds of post translational
modifications may be performed. Meanwhile, this peptide can be packaged
into a vesicle of some sort and then transported down the axon. And along the way further modifications,
or perhaps cleavages of
that peptide can occur. As the initial product of
the transcript is then processed and prepared for its active function
in the presynaptic terminal. Couple of other differences to note. Small molecule transmitters
typically are packaged into vesicles that then are concentrated right along the
active zones at the presynaptic membrane. Whereas peptide transmitters are often
found in vesicles that are diffusing around the presynaptic terminal
further away from that active zone. So consequently, the vesicles
that contain the neuropeptides, which typically are much larger Then
those that contain the small molecules are further removed from those active
sites and therefore require a larger influx of calcium in order to trigger
calcium mediated fusion events. So with a relatively modest
depolarization of a presynaptic terminal we're likely only to see the calcium
mediated fusion of small vesicles that release the small
molecule transmitters. It's only with a very large
depolarization that the presynaptic terminal is likely to release much peptide
neurotransmitter because in order for that to happen,
sites well away from our typical high efficiency active
site are engaged and those larger vesicles then fuse and
release peptide neurotransmitters. But only when that pre-synaptic
terminal is flooded with calcium. So this might be one physiological way of holding in reserve
the peptide neurotransmitters, only when there is intense depolarization
of the pre-synaptic terminal. And lastly, considering the removal of the
neurotransmitter once it's been released the small molecule transmitters
have a variety of systems. The transmitter itself might be degraded,
and pre-cursor substances might be then taken
back up into the [INAUDIBLE] terminal or they may run through a [INAUDIBLE]
cell where they may be in some storage form before being returned from
a [INAUDIBLE] to the [INAUDIBLE] terminal. Of course, the transmitter can
simply diffuse away as well. For a peptide neurotransmitter,
these substances, likewise, are free to diffuse away, but
there are also proteases that are found here in the synaptic cleft that can
cleave these peptide neurotransmitters. And degrade them right at their region of
release in and around the synaptic cleft. So let's also take a few
minutes to consider a typical glutamatergic
synapse in the brain. So as I've already mentioned glutamate's
one of the most important small molecule in neurotransmitters that we have it's widely considered to be the most
important small molecule for mediating fast excitatory events
in the central nervous system. So in a typical pre-synaptic terminal, we have an important
enzyme called glutaminase. This enzyme converts
glutamine into glutamate, and glutamate Is then concentrated
in synaptic vesicles, where it's taken into that
vesicle via a transporter called vesicular glutamate uptake transporter. So, VGLUT, for short. So, this synaptic vesicle then, of course, can fuse with the presynaptic terminal
when calcium floods that active zone. The glutamate is free then
to diffuse into the synaptic cleft where where it can react with
postsynaptic glutamate receptors. Now some of this glutamate, of course, diffuses away from the synaptic cleft
where there are excitatory amino acid transporters in the glial cells that
surround the synaptic compartment. Of course, the important glial cell that we're
talking about here would be the astrocyte. So the excitatory amino acid transporter takes up the glutamate where it's
converted back to glutamine. So glutamine is in essence
a storage form of glutamate that can sit in reserve within
astrocytes before being recycled as needed back to
the presynaptic terminal. So there are other kinds of
cotransporters that allowed glutamine to cycle back to this presynaptic terminal
where it can once again be hydrolyzed by glutaminase in the glutamate ready for
another round of synaptic release. Okay, lastly let's just make a couple
of points here in conclusion. So we've talked about our two classes of
neurotransmitters, or small molecules. Our peptide transmitters, we've also talked about what we've called
some unconventional neurotransmitters, and these neurotransmitters interact
with two classes of receptors. Our ionotropic receptors,
which mediate rapid synaptic events since the receptor for the ligand
as part of an ion channel complex. And there are metabotropic receptors that require the activation
of second messenger systems. So they mediate more slowly evolving and potentially longer
lasting synaptic effects. Our small molecule transmitters
can interact with both kinds of receptors
are peptide neurotransmitters as far as we know only interact with
metabotropic family of receptors. Now I think from this simple schematic,
it should be apparent to you that if we want to understand the post
synaptic activity of a neurotransmitter, we need to know more than simply
the identity of that neurotransmitter. It's not enough to know if it's
a small molecule or if it's a peptide. So knowing the chemical structure
itself is not sufficient to understand the physiology of the effect
mediated by that transmitter. One needs to understand something about
the receptors that interact with that neurotransmitter in question. So in order to account for
the physiological activity of the chemical neurotransmitter
you need to know the receptor. So in our next tutorial, we're going to
talk more about the structure and function of both types of receptors, the ionotrophic receptors and
the metabotropic receptors. And I think you'll be impressed as I am
with the varsity of effects that can be activated, even by the very
same chemical signal. So, next time we'll talk about
neuro transmitter receptors. I'll see you then.