Well welcome back, I think we're ready to
continue to discuss the organization of upper motor neurons and focus on the
premotor cortex. So my learning objective for you, is that
I want you to be able to discuss the organization of the premotor cortex, and
its contributions to the control of volitional movement.
So, I'll remind you again that the premotor cortex is a region of the
posterior frontal lobe, that sits just in front of the pre-central gyrus.
it might include a bit of the anterior bank of the pre-central gyrus but it
extends into the posterior part of the superior, middle and inferior frontal
gyri. And it also extends onto the midline of
the hemisphere. here for example is our paracentral
lobule, so this is where we would find our primary motor cortex and then just
anterior to it. In the medial bank of the superior
frontal sulcus, and then in the banks of the cingulate sulcus, including the
cingulate gyrus itself we find a medial extension of that pre-motor cortex.
Illustrated here in this slide is the distribution of the premotor cortex.
And a rhesus macaque brain, where the details of organization are much more
clear. At least at this stage in our
understanding. So where we find this more orangish
color, that's our premotor cortex. Now there has been a fairly radical
change in our thinking about the premotor cortex in recent years.
some time ago we imagined some kind of hierarchical organization where the
premotor cortex was primarily involved in planning movement.
But the actual execution of the movement required signals that were derived from
the primary motor cortex. So it was thought that the premotor
cortex at a higher plane in some kind of hierarchy for motor control.
Well, those concepts are, are beginning to unravel as we have the greater
appreciation for what's actually encoded in the motor cortex.
But we also, understand much better now that the premotor cortex itself, gives
rise to descending projections to lower motor neurons.
So the argument for premotor cortex, being conceptualized as a higher plane
for motor control seems to be losing some of its attraction.
I think the concept that is becoming much more viable, and frankly much more
interesting and, and productive for understanding upper motor systems.
Is the notion that this premotor cortex actually comprises of a mosaic of
areas. That have some kind of modular
organization, reflecting the encoding of ethologically important motor behaviors.
Now it is helpful to find some way to simplify our understanding of this
mosaic. And I would suggest a means to simplify
would be to recognize a medial part of our premotor cortical mosaic in the
lateral part. Where exactly one would make that
division is not so clear. But perhaps one would, would roughly
subdivide this premotor cortex at about the location of the superior frontal
sulcus. So, our medial division of the premotor
cortex, corresponds to what in the older literature was, described as a
supplementary motor area. So for those of you that are looking at
other resources its support of your learning, you, you may run into that
phrase supplementary motor cortex. It's certainly is still used in both
clinical and scientific discussion. But for our purposes, we'll simply
consider that supplementary motor cortex or SMA for short, a division that is
localized here to the medial part of the premotor cortex.
Now included in that medial part of the premotor cortex, is a very interesting
set of regions, here in the banks of the cingulate sulcus that will spend just
little bit of time talking about. They seem to be involved in the
expression of emotional behavior. Out on the dorsal lateral convexity of
the hemisphere, we see other regions of this regional medial premotor cortex that
are concerned with organizing bi-manual activities.
And this implies that they have a rich set of colossal activities, as they do so
bimanual coordination seems to be a function of this premotor cortex.
There is also a division of this medial premotor cortex, that is especially
concerned with governing voluntary saccadic eye movements, we call this
region the frontal eye field. And this is a part of the premotor cortex
that helps to orient our attention, and therefore what we're looking across the
midline to some location in the contralateral visual hemifield.
Now generally speaking, these medial parts of the premotor cortex seem to be
especially involved with organizing movements that are self-initiated.
Movements that are not necessarily triggered or directed by sensory cues.
One example of what I mean by this, in the frontal eye field, would be turning
our gaze to some object in the contralateral part of the visual field
that we intend to look at. Perhaps there is a clock, over to your
right and you want to look towards your right, to see what time it is.
so, there wasn't necessarily an emerging stimulus that just grabbed our attention,
rather there was an intentionality, about the shift of gaze and that intentionality
was self initiated. Now contrast that if you will recall to
the role of the superior colliculus in organizing eye movements.
If you're outside and a bolt of lightning happened to strike somewhere off in the
distance to one side. You may very well make a reflex movement
of eyes and head posture in order to see that bolt of lightning while it persists.
Well, that is a reflex of saccade that's coordinated at the subcortical level,
through circuitry that involves the retina sending signals to the superior
colliculus. And then the colliculus sending output
that governs the movements of the eyes and the muscles that orient our head and
our neck. We call that a reflex saccade.
that wasn't self initiated in the same sense, as the desire to see what time it
is. So now lets turn our attention to the
lateral parts of the premotor cortex. Here what we find is a mosaic [UNKNOWN]
that are involved in organizing movements, that are often guided by
sensory information. Or at least with the interactions that we
might have with the world around us, and that would include social interactions as
well. For example, we find areas that exist
here in the inferior part of this pre-motor cortex, that are especially
concerned with social communication. Now for us and the human brain we can
recognize one region that is of great interest, and it's found in the posterior
part of the inferior frontal gyrus. And this is a region that goes by the
name Broca's area. So, Broca's area is part of this premotor
cortex, that organizes the vocal motor apparatus for the production of speech.
They are very likely nearby regions also part of this premotor mosaic, that is
involved in the production of language in written form.
Either through the act of writing with a writing implement, or, of course now, we
can touch on keyboards and touchscreens. And that is a motor act, that is involved
in communicating thought. And semantic content through symbolic
representation, and that seems to be one function of these more lateral and
inferior divisions of this premotor mosaic.
Also in this same region of the pre-motor cortex, we have some really fascinating
neurons that have captured world wide attention in recent years.
These are neurons that are concerned not just with the expression of movement,
that we make with our own body, but also encoding the intentions of movements that
we see other individuals perform. And because of this mirror like capacity
of encoding our own movements, and observe movements, such neurons with this
behavior are called mirror motor neurons. Mirror motor neurons were discovered
quite accidentally, when recordings were being made in this lateral premotor
cortex, while monkeys were engaged in visually guided reaching behaviors to
pick up a small object. And what was observed, is that when the
monkey simply sat passively while the experimenters reloaded the apparatus by
executing a very similar type of hand movement.
The neurons in the premotor cortex in the monkey's brain, responded at the sight of
the human hand performing the very similar act that the monkey himself was
about to execute. This is illustrated here, in this figure
from our textbook. what we find is a recording from one such
neuron in the lateral part of the premotor cortex.
And we're looking at raster plots, such as what we saw previously, so each row is
an individual trial. And each little tick mark represents an
action potential. What was really surprising at the time
was that the very same neuron, was seen to increase its firing rate when a very
similar act was observed in a different agent.
In this case the hand of the experimenter.
Well as you might imagine this was a really shocking discovery that neurons in
the motor cortex might represent movement observed in another person.
So, quite a lot of work has gone on in the last two decades or so to really
explore, the encoding of movement and tension, that is observed here in this
lateral premotor cortex. what is discovered is that these neurons
seem to care about the agent itself. if a tool is used for example, to preform
a particular movement goal, then this neuron might not be concerned with that
particular behavior. In this example, if a food pellet is
retrieved with a pair of pliers this neuron doesn't seem to fire.
whereas the natural movement that the monkey makes, or is observed by a human
hand will elicit a robust set of discharges in this premotor neuron.
very interestingly, if the monkey is prevented from actually observing the
contact of the hand with the food pellet, that is the consummation of the motor act.
by occluding that view with some kind of a screen, we still see activation of this
so-called mirror motor neuron in the lateral premotor cortex.
It's as if what this neuron is encoding, is the goal of the behavior, or the
intention of the behavior, which in this case, is executing your precision grip to
retrieve a pellet. Even when that act is not observed,
there's still activity in this premotor neuron.
So the discovery of these mirror motor neurons has really led to, I think, a
really remarkable hypothesis. And that is that, the lateral part of the
premotor cortex is involved in encoding the intention of movement.
And that movement intention might provide a foundation for social cognition,
because these neurons are concerned not just with my intentions, but also with
your intentions. When we observe the activities of others
we might actually represent that behavior within our motor system.
And that might give us a sort of knowledge or understanding of the
intention of that motor act. And this is a very active and frankly
quite controversial domain of cognitive neuroscience at the moment, so we don't
quite know how this is going to all play out.
But, I do suspect that this is an important discovery, that is going to
inform our understanding of social cognition.
Perhaps even the basis for disorders that lead to impairments in social cognition
such as some developmental disorders that result in the autism spectrum of
disorders. This also provides some intriguing
possibilities for intervention. If, in such neurodevelopmental disorders
of cognition, there may be an underlying problem with the motor system.
Then perhaps there is a movement-based intervention, that might help to
restructure connections in this part of the brain that could produce some
functional benefit to the patient. Well, that's total speculation on my part
at this point. But I think it's an interesting idea
that's worthy of some study.