Welcome to the second of the three
tutorials that I have for you about synaptic plasticity.
In this tutorial, we're going to talk about spike timing-dependent plasticity.
So again our concern is for three very important core concepts in the field of
Neuroscience. We continue to talk about the
communication among neurons, using electrical and chemical signals.
And how life experiences can change the structure and function of the nervous
system. And as we learn more about these
fundamental properties. We are going to learn how better to
promote healthy living and the treatment of disease.
So again, this is a very exciting field in modern Neuroscience.
And the future couldn't be brighter in terms of anticipating how discovery in
the field of Neuroscience is going to improve the human condition.
Our learning objectives are again to characterize general cellular mechanisms
for synapatic change. And then I want you to be able to discuss
the importance of the timing of the postsynaptic response relative to the
presynaptic activity. For the mechanism of synaptic plasticity
that we observe in the postsynaptic cell. So those are our learning objectives.
And to get started, let's review, again, the general cellular mechanisms that lead
to synaptic plasticity. Well, we went over this in the previous
tutorial and perhaps it bears repetition. synaptic plasticity begins when neural
activity triggers the activation of postsynaptic second messenger systems.
The trigger in that postsynaptic cell is typically an alteration in the level of
intracellular calcium. The level of intracellular calcium is
critical, because calcium-dependent second messenger systems are then
activated. And those systems can then activate
either protein kinases, which phosphorylate target proteins.
Or protein phosphatases, which dephosophorylate target proteins.
And it's the alteration in protein phosphorylation that either turns on or
turns off target proteins. And together, these events mediate the
early stages of long-term synaptic plasticity.
So these are mechanisms that are operating upon cellular molecular
machinery already present within the postsynaptic cell.
Long-term synaptic change, however, requires alterations in gene
transcription. So this is the general scenario by which
plasticity plays out typically in a calcium dependent manner.
And the key difference between one valance of plasticity, if you will.
Or another, is the level of intracellular calcium that's triggered by the synaptic
activity. Well, what I want to tell you about today
in this tutorial is, something called spike timing-dependent plasticity.
And I want to make clear, I'm not talking about a totally different form of
plasticity. Than what we've already discussed in
terms of long-term potentiation and long-term depression.
Rather, I want to help you understand through this spike timing-dependent
framework. How plasticity plays out in ongoing
patterns of activity in the brain. Spike timing-dependent plasticity
provides for us a framework for understanding plasticity in the brain one
postsynaptic spike at a time. And here's what I mean by that.
Real synapses seldom, if ever, experience brief trains of high frequency
stimulation of the sort. That were used in the hippocampus slice
preparations, in order to demonstrate long-term potentiation.
So one might reasonably ask. How, then, does plasticity work in real
circuits? if they don't experience the kind of
stimuli that typically were used at least in the classical studies of long-term
potentiation. Well, here's the spike timing-dependent
plasticity framework. again, it allows us to understand these
principles of plasticity. One spike at a time without necessarily
depending upon a special train of stimuli in order to induce a synaptic change.
So, consider a synapse where we've got a presynaptic input to a postsynaptic
neuron. And in our experiements that I'll be
talking about here. It's possible to stimulate the
presynaptic axon. And induce a action potential at that
presynaptic terminal, at some period of time.
Either before or after an action potential is recorded in the postsynaptic
neuron. Now if this is a mature, strong synapse.
You might anticipate that activity in the presynaptic terminal will lead to the
generation of an action potential in the post synaptic cell.
And indeed it's possible to find such synapses for which that behavior is
observed. And that's what we find in this
illustration here in figure 8.18 from your textbook.
So, there is an action potential in the presynaptic cell.
And about 20 milliseconds later, there is an action potential in the postsynaptic
cell. So we call this presynaptic activity
before postsynaptic activity. This is what we might expect if our
presynaptic cell, let's call that neuron A is firing an action potential.
And that leads to the activation of our second cell, we call call that neuron B.
So for such a synaptic connection, it's possible to look over time.
What is the amplitude of the postsynaptic potential or the postsynaptic current.
following some, structured pairing of activity between the pre and the
postsynaptic element. And so that's what's being shown here in
this recording we have excitatory postsynaptic current amplitude on the y
axis. And time on the x axis relative to some
structured stimulation between the pre and the postsynaptic element.
And what we find is that when we provide that stimulus.
Where the presynaptic input happens before the postsynaptic input.
Then there is an elevation of the excitatory postsynaptic current.
So, the amplitude is increased by about 40%.
And so this is evidence of long-term potentiation in this pre-before
postsynaptic regime. Now, since we can control the activity
with our microelectrodes. It's possible to stimulate the
presynaptic terminal. at a time that actually comes following
the generation of a postsynaptic action potential.
Now, I'll just ask you to remember that our typical neurons that we have in
structures like the cerebral cortex recieve inputs from many hundreds even
thousands of different synaptic connections.
Different exonal inputs converging upon the dendrex at the very same cell.
So that cell might fire an action potential in response to activity.
And one of these many other hundreds or even thousands of inputs.
So, we're studying one particular synaptic connection.
And we're varying the timing at which that input is activated relative to the
firing of a postsynaptic action potential.
So if we stimulate such that the postsynaptic action potential actually
happens before the presynaptic action potential.
We might find a recording that looks like this.
So, the large action potential represents the postsynaptic spike.
And then some period of time following it, maybe 30 milliseconds or so later.
The presynaptic input is stimulated. And we see some post synaptic potential
that's recorded. But that post synaptic potential
importantly in this regime follows the triggereing of the action potential.
And under that situtation where post synaptic activity happens before pre
synatptic activity. Notice that there, now is the development
of a weakening. And the amplitude of the excitatory
post-synaptic current. This is long-term depression.
This is what happens, basically when the postsynaptic neuron is being influenced
to fire an action potential by some other input.
Other than the one that we're stimulating in this experiment.
When experiments such as these can be done over and over again, varying the
interval between presynaptic activity and postsynaptic activity.
It's possible to generate a function that now accounts for spike time-independent
plasticity. And what we see is that in the pre before
post regime, that is, when a pre-synaptic input is in a position to fire the
postsynaptic cell. There may be a marked degree of
potentiation. So this then is long-term potentiation.
That can be recorded if the interval between the pre synaptic firing and post
synaptic firing is less than about 20 miliseconds.
Now 20 milliseconds it's, it's kind of magical interval.
if you follow me here, that's an interval that's suggestive of a milo synaptic
connection. Where the input in question, the one that
we can control with the micro-electrode. Is effective in triggering the action
potential in the postsynaptic cell. We might think of this as their as
providing some coordination of activity. If you will, between the pre and the
postsynaptic element. Where the presynaptic input is reliably
leading to the activation of that postsynaptic cell.
So pre before post leads to long-term potentiation.
On the other hand, again, we're calling that postsynaptic neuron is going to be
receiving hundreds of thousands of other inputs.
It may fire an action potential in response to some other input than the one
that we have control of with our microelectrode.
Well, should that happen before the stimulus is applied to the input in
question. We might have long-term depression in
this post before pre-regime. So this now is long-term depression where
the excitatory postsynaptic current is actually diminished.
When the firing of the postsynaptic cell precedes the firing of the input in
question. So we might imagine that this post before
pre is a picture of incoordination between the pre and postsynaptic elements
in question. Well, here, in this part of the country,
especially as winter is turning into spring.
one sport that is popular in my own family, anyway, is baseball.
And baseball involves a pitcher throwing a ball at a batter, that has a, wooden or
a metal bat. And the batter has to time the swing just
right in order to hit that baseball. Well, if the batter begins to swing the
bat just at the right moment in time. Then he or she might strike the ball and
might hit a homerun. That's a good thing for the batter.
We might consider that to be a mediphore for long-term potentiation.
If the swing of the bat occurs at just the right time.
As the ball is entering the hitting zone. Then the batter begins to pass the bat
through the hitting zone and the two make contact and well.
That's a good thing for the batter. So we'll call that long-term
potentiation. Well, there's a particular kind of pitch
in the sport of baseball that's intended to deceive the batter.
The batter sees the pitcher release the ball.
And the batter anticipates that the ball is going at a faster rate than it
actually is. This is called a changeup pitch, meaning
a change in the speed of the ball. Well, an effective changeup will result
in the batter swinging too early. That is, the bat will pass through the
hitting zone before the baseball arrives. I like to think of that, as post before
pre. The bat passes through the hitting zone
too soon before the opportunity to hit the ball arrives.
Well that's not a good thing for the batter.
We might call that long-term depression. Well, I was actually invited to think
about this metaphor by a student I had a few years ago.
Who thought about this spike timing-dependent plasticity function and
said, oh, so long-term depression is a near miss.
And I thought, exactly, it's a near miss. Like, swinging through a changeup.
It's a near miss. The batter swings the bat, but
prematurely, before the arrival of the baseball.
The postsynaptic activity happens just before the presynaptic activity.
That's actually quite bad for that synaptic connection.
That leads to the depression of that connection.
Whereas if the batter never swung the bat, if it stayed on his or her shoulder,
there'd be no strike. Well, I think that's an important lesson.
In order for the synaptic connection to be depressed, it actually has to be used.
But it has to be used poorly. That is to say, there has to be some
incoordination at that synapse. Where the postsynaptic neuron fires in
response to some other input. Not the one in question.
But it needs to be a near miss. That postsynaptic neuron needs to fire
before, but just before the presynaptic neuron.
Now, I want you to notice something about the shape of this function.
Notice that the shape of the long-term potentiation phase,[SOUND], is roughly
about half the width of the shape of the long-term depression function.
Well, I think that's kind of interesting. my background is in developmental
neurobiology. So I like to think about how plasticity
works out in the context of development. And as neural circuits become active,
there seems to be a lot of noise and those activity patterns that develop in
the brain. We might think of that noise as being
somewhat unstructured. And somewhat unshaped by either the brain
itself or by it's interactions with the outside world.
Well, if the interval for depression is twice as large as the interval for
potentiation. Then that suggests that more of that
noise is going to fall in the phase of this function that favors depression.
Such that the noise is going to tend to lead to the depression of those active
synaptic connections. Whereas those synaptic connections that
are mediating some structure, where there is preactivty, presynaptic activity
leading to postsynaptic activity. That's coordination.
So as signal emerges out of the noise of the developing brain, there's the
potential to focus in on that signal. Potentiate those synapes that are
effectively driving activity in those circuits.
And meanwhile depress the other weaker inputs that are out of sync, that are not
being coordinated, not being structured. So this may be one mechanism by which the
brain imposes a temporal filter on i'ts own activity patterns.
As a way of selecting those that are leading to an increase in the
coordination of firing across synaptic connections.
Well, one way that the brain has of imposing some structure over it's spatial
and temporal patterns of activity is through interactions with the
environment. And in context of the developing brain,
it's intriguing to hypothesize that sensory experience might be one source of
structure. That favors the potentiation of
functional synaptic connections. Whereas, the noise that otherwise is not
being well structured by sensory experience, might lead to depression.
And perhaps the weakening, and maybe even the loss and the pruning away of synaptic
connections that are, that are not functional.
Well, this brings us to the close of this tutorial.
The third and final tutorial in this series will put all of this together in a
very powerful framework. That has been with us through many
decades now and continues to inspire our understanding of synaptic plasticity.
So we'll talk about Hebb's Postulate in our next session.