.
For this lab lesson, we want to explore the ventral surface of the human brain.
So I'm going to take this specimen and hold it up so that you can have the clear
view of the ventral surface of the brain. Now, what I'd like to do is just walk you
through the features of this brain surface from the front part, the anterior part of
the brain, through the back part, the posterior part.
So, towards the front part of the brain, the first set of structures that we can
note are these two long tracks on either side of the mid line that sit on the
bottom of the frontal lobe. These are the lateral Olfactory Tracts
that terminate in an Olfactory Bulb. And as those names imply, these structures
have to do with our sense of olfaction or our sense of smell.
The next interesting feature we encounter is the optic nerve, from one side and the
other, that come together and form an X shape.
That X shape is called the optic chiasm. Chiasm means x or a cross, so it's a
crossing of the nerve fibers that form these two optic nerves.
Just behind the optic nerves is the floor of the diencephalon or the ventral surface
of the hypothalamus. And there's a bit of a hole in this
specimen, which is where the stalk of the pituitary attaches to the hypothalamus.
That was stalk was removed and in it's place we see a little bit of a hole that
allow us to look through into a space that sits right in the middle of the
hypothalamus called the third ventricle. Just behind the stalk of the pituitary are
two bumps that define the posterior limit of a hypothalamus.
Those are called the mammillary bodies that you're seeing right here.
Now, if I tilt this specimen a little bit more, you can appreciate a dark space just
behind these mammillary bodies, and this is roughly the junction of the
diencephalon in the midbrain. In fact, the space is defined by these two
broad columns called the Cerebral Peduncles or Cerebral stalks, one on
either side of this space. Those stalks are a component of the mid
brain or the metencephalon. And as the term Peduncle or stalk implies,
this is a massive bundle of white matter that allows the forebrain to connect with
everything below it, the hind brain and the spinal cord.
Now just inferior to the cerebral peduncles, as we see them here in the
midbrain, is the pons, and the cerebellum. The pons, extends out laterally.
Again another massive bundle white matter connecting the brain stem to the
cerebellum. And just inferior to the pons, we have the
medulla oblongata, or the medulla for short.
And on the ventral view of the medulla, two striking features appear along the
midline. It's a pair of structures called the
medullary pyramids that run on either side of the midline.
This is a very important fiber pathway that runs through the brain stem.
It's called the corticospinal tract, and there's one on each side of the midline.
These tracts contain the fibers of the motor cortex that are sending their axons
down into the spinal cord to govern voluntary movement.
One additional feature of the medulla That sits just next to the medullary pyramid is
this bulging shape. It looks like an olive that has been cut
in half, and stuck to the side of the medulla, just lateral to the medullary
pyramid. And thankfully, that's what we call this
structure. This structure's called the olive, so it's
easy to remember. So we have the medullary pyramids right
along the midline, and then just lateral to the medullary pyramids is this bulging
structure called the olive. Now, let's turn our attention to the
cerebral cortex as we can see it on the inferior surface of the brain.
So, what we see towards the front of the brain is the inferior surface of the
frontal lobe. And this part of the frontal lobe sits
right above the orbits in the skull. And for that reason, we call this the
orbital cortex. Just near the posterior part of the
frontal lobe, we begin to encounter the temporal lobe, which grows out and
underneath the frontal portion of the lateral fissure.
So, in this part of the cortex, we're looking at the inferior surface of the
temporal lobe. But to see the rest of the inferior
surface of the temporal lobe, we need to move to a different specimen that has had
the brain stem and the cerebellum removed. And now in a second specimen, we can have
a more clear view of the entire ventral surface of the brain with the brain stem
and cerebellum removed so that we can see the features on the cerebral cortex of the
inferior temporal and occipital lobes. So, here again is the temporal lobe that
extends from the posterior part of the frontal lobe, all the way back towards the
occipital lobe, with the junction being somewhere in this region right about here.
So, this bit of brain is the temporal lobe.
And on its inferior surface, we have a long gyrus that extends throughout the
length of the inferior temporal lobe back towards the occipital lobe.
That's called the Occipitotemporal Gyrus. Sometimes there is a small sulcus that
divides it into a lateral and medial components.
And then along the medial edge of the temporal lobe, there's a structure that we
call the Parahippocampal Gyrus. And deep in the anterior part of the
temporal lobe, in this position, this parahippocampal gyrus folds in upon itself
into a structure that we call the hippocampus.
And we'll see the hippocampus when we look at sections through the brain.
Now, the Occipital temporal gyrus and the parahippocampal gyrus extend down into the
occipital lobe, and at some point in the occipital lobe, we define a region that is
a boundary between the lingual gyrus near the midline, and what remains here of the
occipital temporal gyrus. Sometimes this region of the inferior
occipital lobe is called the fusiform gyrus, because of the superficial shape
that is sometimes appreciated as the sulci come together.
We see similar features in the opposite hemisphere.
The same set of long, lateral and medial occipital temporal gyri, and then along
the mid-line of the temporal lobe, the parahippocampal gyrus.