.
My goal for this lab lesson today Is to help you conceptualize the gyri and the
sulci that define the surface features of the human brain.
When we look at the adult human brain, it's hard to appreciate what is consistent
form one specimen to the next and what's different.
This lesson is all about the consistencies and once you conceptualize those
consistencies It will be just a wonderful experience to appreciate what's different
from one brain to the next. When you look at the surface features of
the brain, the gyri and the sulci, we see patterns and these patterns are analogous
to the fingerprints on each of your digits.
Those fingerprints have standard patterns for each digit, but in each individual of
course we know that their finger prints are quite distinct.
Something similar can be said of the surface features of the cerebral
hemispheres. There are in fact primary sulci and gyri
that are present in every normal human brain and then there are secondary and
tertiary gyri that help to find those distinctive.
Qualities of the surface pattern in each cerebral hemisphere.
So, we're going to focus on those primary sulci gyrus.
And I think a great way to conceptualize the organization of the cerebral
hemispheres will be to actually allow you to see how I place my fingers on the gyri
of the cerebral hemisphere. And i want you to imagine that my fingers
are gyri and the space between my fingers are sulci.
So let's begin with the central sulcus. The central sulcus is right near the
middle of the hemisphere and it's defined by two roughly parallel gyri.
A precentral gyrus and a postcentral gyrus.
So, my index finger is representing and overlying the precentral gyrus, my middle
finger is overlying the postcentral gyrus, and the space between my fingers
represents the central sulcus. Now, while I keep those two fingers there
I want to demonstrate for you the remaining gyral features of the frontal
lobe. And to do that what I'm going to do is
place three fingers in parallel that are roughly orthogonal to this central sulcus.
So I have a finger down below which is overlying the inferior frontal gyrus, a
finger in the middle that's overlying the middle frontal gyrus, and then a finger up
on the top of the hemisphere that's representing the superior frontal gyrus.
So three fingers representing three roughly parallel gyri that are meeting the
central sulcus almost at a right angle; a little bit more obtuse than a right angle.
So now, let's look at the parietal lobe. .
I'll reestablish the central sulcus with my left hand.
So now, my middle finger is representing the precentral gyrus.
And my index finger is representing the post central gyrus.
And to conceptualize the parietal lobe, all I need to do is place two fingers that
are running again roughly at a right angle to the central sulcus.
My index finger is near the dorsal margin of the hemisphere.
We call that gyral formation the superior parietal lobule.
And my middle finger is just below the superior parietal lobule representing the
inferior parietal lobule. The space between them is a prominent
sulcus of the parietal lobe called the intraparietal sulcus.
Okay, now, let's move to the temporal lobe.
In the temporal lobe, just as we did for the frontal lobe, we can conceptualize
this lateral surface as being comprised of three, long, parallel gyri.
So we had three, long, parallel gyri in the frontal lobe, and we have three long
parallel gyri in the temporal lobe. We have a superior temporal gyrus, a
middle temporal gyrus and an inferior temporal gyrus.
And the two spaces between my three fingers would be the superior temporal
sulcus. And the inferior temporal sulcus.
Now, with this specimen, the brain stem and the cerebellum are preventing me from
conceptualizing the inferior surface of the brain so I'm going to opt for an
additional specimen to extend the placement of my fingers to the inferior
surface ff the temporal lobe. In the second specimen I've removed the
brain stem and the cerebellum so that we can have a better view of the inferior
surface of the cerebral hemisphere. Now, I just showed you placing three
Fingers along the lateral surface of the temporal lobe and then to complete the
picture of the temporal lobe I'm just going to lay my additional two fingers
right along two long gyri that we see on this inferior surface.
So now I've got five fingers on the temporal lobe.
On the lateral aspect I've got a superior temporal gyrus.
A middle temporal gyrus, and an inferior temporal gyrus.
And then, as we look onto the ventral and medial aspect of the temporal lobe.
My index finger is representing a long straight gyrus that runs from the temporal
lobe back towards the occipital lobe. This is called the occipitotemporal gyrus.
And sometimes the posterior part is called the fusiform gyrus.
And then my thumb represents a very interesting medial gyrus of the temporal
lobe called the parahippocampal gyrus. In fact the knuckle of my thumb is sort of
sticking out just a little bit. Because indeed there's something that
looks like a knuckle on this gyrus called the Uncus.
The paraphippocampal gyrus folds in upon itself to form a really wonderful
structure in the brain called the hippocampus.
And we'll see that in cross sections through the brain.
So five fingers on five gyri in the temporal lobe.
And now to complete our lesson on placing fingers on the gyri of the cerebral
hemispheres, I've got yet a third specimen that allows me to work on the medial
surface of the hemisphere. But, to approach the medial surface, I
want to begin again with the central sulcus.
And you'll recall that I defined the central sulcus with two fingers on the
lateral surface with the precentral gyrus, the postcentral gyrus and the space
between my fingers, they conceptualize this essential sulcus.
Now what I want to do is, I want to reverse my approach to the central sulcus.
And let my fingertips wrap along the dorsal surface of the brain, such that my
fingertips come together in the part of the brain called the paracentral lobule.
So now imagine that my two fingers are fused together.
That's the relation of the pre and the postcentral gryi to the paracentral
lobule. So that portion contributed now by my
middle finger is the precentral gyrus. And the part contributed by my index
finger is the post central gyrus and again those two finger tips are two gyri fuse
just above and in front of the branches of the singular sockets.
Now, the rest of the frontal lobe can be conceptualized as having two long gyrate.
The cingulate gyrus that runs right on top of the corpus callosum and then the gyrus
that forms the dorsal margin of the hemisphere.
This is simply the continuation of the superior frontal gyrus onto the medial
face of the hemisphere Now let's look at the occipital lobe.
The occipital lobe is in this region of the brain and it can be conceptualized as
having two gyri that are somewhat parallel to each other.
The inferior of the two is called the lingual gyrus.
And this is a gyrus that forms something like a tongue shape on the bottom of the
occipital lobe. Lingual means tongue.
And then, just above the lingual gyrus is a wedge shaped structure called the cuneus
gyrus. Cuneus is a Latin word that means wedge.
Now, just in front of the wedge is a gyrus that wraps around from the superior
parietal lobule and this we call the precuneus which of course would simply
mean in front of the wedge. So the rest of the medial face then is
comprised Of an occipital lobe defined by two gyri, a lingual gyrus and a cuneus
gyrus with a space between them being the calcarine sulcus.
And then at about a right angle is the precuneus gyrus with a space between the
precuneus gyrus and my two finger tips representing the occipital lobe is a long
straight sulcus called the parietal occipital sulcus.
Now, you may not have a human brain to wrap around your fingers but if you are
fortunate enough to have access to brain model I would encourage you to do this
exercise. Perhaps you can even make your own brain
model out of modeling clay, or perhaps even just with a round shape balloon that
you can mark up and put your own fingers on the gyri to help conceptualize the
complex anatomy of the cerebral hemispheres.