Welcome back to this tutorial, on upper
motor neuronal control of movement. now I'd like to turn our attention away
from the cortex, and into the brain stem. My learning objective for you here, is
that I want you to be able to discuss the neural centers, that give rise to medial
descending projections. From upper motor neurons in the
brainstem, to lower motor neurons associated with eventual horn of the
spinal cord and even in the brain stem itself, in the motor nuclei of the
cranial nerves. So our brainstem upper motor neurons
include, primarily two sorts of populations of cells.
There's a population of neurons associated with the vestibular nuclei.
And we've talked some about these, in a previous tutorial.
And then there's a population of neurons, that emanates form the central core
region of the brainstem. That is the core of the tegmentum of
brainstem, we call this core the reticular formation.
And the reticular formation really extends throughout the entire brainstem,
but the portion of it that gives rise to projections to lower motor neurons, is
primarily found in the pons and the medulla.
Okay. So, let me just take a, a minute or two
to remind you, of the projections that arise from the vestibular nuclei and
descent and terminate in the spinal cord. you'll recall that there are
vestibulospinal connections, that are concerned with mediating reflexes that
are sensed by our vestibular apparatus. And the sensory signal is going to be
some kind of an acceleration, or movement of the head.
So this movement could be a rotational acceleration of the head, which would be
sensed by our semicircular canals. It could be a linear acceleration or a
tilt of the head, sensed by the otolithic organs.
and these signals might very well necessitate an adjustment of posture.
And in postural adjustments imply that there must be some change in the output
of the spinal cord involving the axial muscles, the proximal limb muscles, and
perhaps even the distal muscles of the limbs.
And these reflexes connecting head movement to postural adjustment, are
mediated near these vestibulospinal connections.
So there is a lateral vestibulospinal tract, which arises from our lateral
vestibular nucleus. One division of this vestibular nuclei
complex. And this projection is primarily an
ipsilateral projection, that runs down the spinal cord and terminates among the
cell groups, that are concerned with extensor tone, primarily in the lower
extremities. So one example that I've given you before
would be, standing up on a bus or a train.
That is unexpectedly encountering bumps or jolts along the path.
And so these are sensations, that are being detected by the vestibular system.
And in order to stay upright, to not fall over as the floor is moving under you
feet, there needs to be a moment to moment adjustment in posture.
And that's what's mediated via this lateral vestibular spinal tract.
Now, there are other divisions of this vestibular nuclear complex, that give
rise to a medial vestibular spinal tract. And this projection is much more
bilateral, than our lateral vestibulospinal tract and it's
terminating among medial lower motor neuronal columns.
And these columns are mainly found in the cervical region of the spinal cord, so
one example of the operation of this medial vestibulospinal tract.
would be the reflexes that are elicited with a sudden forward rotation of the
head. So what I'm thinking of is, tripping and
falling. So in order to brace ourselves for the
impact with the ground, we want to get our face out of the way, so we dorsiflex
our neck, and we often extend our arms to brace ourselves against the fall.
So that's a reflex. So the forward acceleration of the head,
triggers this reflexive response that's mediated via the cervical levels of the
spinal cord. That's our medial vestibulospinal
pathway. Now, I want to make just a couple of
points and then we'll be ready to move on.
I don't want you to be confused about the nomenclature of these vestibulospinal
pathways, especially the lateral vestibulospinal pathway.
This pathway, is somewhat lateral in the anterior and medial white matter of the
spinal cord, but we still consider it part of our descending medial systems,
for upper motor neuronal control of posture.
And the more proximal muscles of the limbs.
So, consider together these vestibulospinal projections, part of that
medial descending system. That adjusts posture and sets the gain of
local segmental reflexes. One additional point I would make about
these vestibulospinal connections, is that they're operating on sensory
feedback. So there is some kind of action that's
being sensed, and then an adjustment is made subsequent to that action.
So this is a feedback operation, adjusting posture in response to a sensory
signal. Okay, let's move on and talk about the
reticulospinal system. So, the reticular formation is really a
complicated network of structures, that we find throughout the tegmentum of the
brainstem. So indeed the reticular formation is a
complicated network of nerves, that spans the the cord of the brainstem.
one can even argue that its continuous with the intermediate gray matter of the
spinal cord inferiorly. And continuous with the lateral portions
of the hypothalamus, on the superior side of the brainstem.
Well, within this network of cells, we now know that there are actually discreet
circuits. And many of these circuits, have specific
functions with respect the visceral motor control and somatic motor control.
There are elements of the reticular formation, that do in fact project
broadly and diffusely throughout the nervous system.
And those are projections that have an important role, in modulating brain
function in various regions. Broadly speaking, we recognize the
rostral part of the reticular formation, coming from the mesencephalon.
And from the rostral part of the pons, as having those kinds of projections that
modulate activity in the forebrain. the more inferior part of the reticular
formation. And the caudal pons and in the medulla.
That's where we tend to find these circuits, that have a kind of pre-motor
function. That is, they help to coordinate the
output of lower motor neurons. Many of these lower motor neurons are
concerned with visceral motor functions, including cardiac rhythms and breathing
rhythms, and perhaps even digestive rhythms.
Other, other networks are concerned with somatic motor function.
And here's where we imagine our paramedian pontine reticular formation
coming in, and helping to organize horizontal gaze movements.
But there are other circuits, within this reticular formation that are concerned
with modulating the gain of segmental reflexes in the spinal cord.
As well as, making adjustments of posture.
So, to go back to the previous slide for a moment, I would highlight that there
are. Indeed projections from this reticular
formation, down through the anterior medial white matter of the spinal chord.
And then near their level or termination, they tend to bifurcate and supply
bilaterally, the medial columns of lower motor neurons that are found in the
spinal chord. Now, one key way to differentiate the
contributions of the reticulospinal connections from those of the
vestibulospinal connections, has to do with time.
You'll recall that I made the point that the vestibulospinal projections, are
operating as a feedback circuit. taking a sensory signal, the movement of
the head and implementing a motor adjustment.
So in this sense, the vestibulospinal system, is operating based on the
information acquired in the past. The reticulospinal system, is concerned
primarily with making anticipatory adjustments of posture.
That is, making adjustments of posture that anticipate, the actions that are
about to happen. So, here's an example that helps me
understand differentiation of these two systems.
Imagine a sprinter, and that sprinter is in the blocks awaiting the sound of the
starter's pistol. So that sprinter has just heard the
words, ready, set, and now there's an anticipation.
There is a time of preparation of the body, especially the lower body, for this
explosive motor action, of sprinting out of the starter's blocks.
And engaging in this pattern of locomotion, that is essential for
competing in this activity, this, this sprint.
That moment of ready and set, is where our reticulospinal system, will be
engaged in setting the tone of the segmental circuits.
So that an explosive motor action can be executed with maximum energy, and
performance, and skill. So this reticulospinal connection, is
going to be especially active during this time of ready and set.
It will be preparing the circuitry of lower motor neurons, for this explosive
action that's about to happen. Okay, now you're that sprinter the gun's
going off. You've exploded out of blocks, and now
you're running down the lane in the course of this race.
Imagine that you stumble, that stumble is not something that you planned and its
not something that you necessarily anticipated.
It just happened. Well, that stumble is going to evolve
some unexpected acceleration of your head.
That will engage the distributive system and hopefully.
You'll be able to catch yourself, and maybe break stride a little bit.
But you'll make some adjustment, I trust, and continue on in the race.
Well, that stumble, and the adjustment that allowed you to continue in the race,
is a function of our vestibulospinal system.
Vestibular systems sensed the unexpected acceleration of the head, and an
adjustment in posture, and in the mechanics of locomotion were implemented
via the vestibulospinal system. Well, I hope this image of starting and
then running a race has been helpful and helps you to differentiate the
contributions of the reticulospinal system from the vestibulospinal system.
Well, if the reticulospinal system is going to serve to prepare you for action.
To anticipate the activity that is being planned for, then it implies that it must
know what that planned activity is all about.
The implication anatomically is that there ought to be connections from our
pre-motor cortex, down to the reticular formation, and indeed there are.
there are projections that emanate from our motor cortex, that are informing
these neurons in the reticular formation, probably bilaterally about the activity
that's about to be performed. And then the reticulospinal connections,
are those that actually make the appropriate adjustments of gain and
muscle tone for the actions that are necessary.
Now, there's one other structure that is often considered to be a collection of
upper motor neurons, in the brainstem that I want to mention.
And it's found right here, in the dorsal part of the midbrain.
And what I'm attempting to identify for you here is the superior colliculus.
Recall that the superior colliculus, is one of the little hills that forms the
tectum or the roof of the midbrain, just above the cerebral aqueduct which we see
here. So there's the inferior colliculus.
That's an auditory relay and then the superior colliculus which is the
structure that I'd like to just mention very briefly here.
So the superior colliculus, is a motor structure that integrates sensory
information from vision, from audition, from the canal sensation.
And probably also from pain and temperature sensation.
So these sensory signals are integrated in the networks of the superior
colliculus, and a motor signal emanates out of the deeper layers of the
structure. The superior colliculus is concerned with
making reflexive adjustments of gaze and posture.
Towards a sensory stimulus. So I already gave you the example of a
bolt of lightening perhaps there could be a unexpected pinch of the skin.
Or maybe a sound that comes from some lateral position in our auditory
environment that captures our attention. Either one of those three examples will
often induce a reflexive shift of our gaze and our attention, towards a
particular stimulus. Well how does the superior colliculus do
this? Well we've talked elsewhere about the
role of the superior colliculus. In coordinating saccadic eye movements,
through a portion of the reticular formation, that coordinates movements in
the horizontal plane or in the vertical plane.
But there are also adjustments of the cervical spinal cord, that are concerned
with the turning of our head and the adjustments and the stabilization of our
posture. Those adjustments that are mediated in
the spinal cord, are carried out by projections from the superior colliculus
into the reticular formation, which then projects to the spinal cord.
There may also be direct projections in the human nervous system from the
superior colliculus, to the lower motor circuits of the cervical cord themselves.
But we know that at least there is a role for the reticular formation in mediating
the signals that are coming out of the superior colliculus.
So, it's fair enough to include the superior colliculus in our conversation
about upper motor neurons in the brainstem okay.
We'll shift gears again and talk about the neural circuits for expressing
emotional behavior.