Alright, I'd like to switch gears a bit
now and talk to you about the anatomy of the output of the cerebellum.
And we'll consider this anatomy really in, in two steps.
First, I'd like to talk to you about the ascending outputs from the cerebellum.
They are ascending anatomically and that they leave the cerebellum and they enter
the brainstem via the Superior cerebellar peduncle.
And then they ascend in the superior direction, to encounter targets in the
brainstem and in the motor thalamus. So, the source of these outputs are the
Deep cerebellar nucleis, specifically the dentate nucleus and perhaps the
interposed nuclei as well. But the dentate nucleus quantitatively is
the largest and most significant of the sources of these ascending cerebellar
outputs. So, recall again that we've got a bit of
a challenge that we've got one side of the cerebrum is related to the opposite
cerebellum. So, for the outputs of the cerebellum to
impact these upper motor circuits, there needs to be a crossing of the midline, a
decussation. And here's how it happens.
The deep cerebellar nuclei in question, namely the dentate nucleus, grows an axon
that exits the cerebellum through the Superior cerebellar peduncle.
And some of these axons will ascend and terminate in the ventral lateral complex
of the thalamus, the ventral lateral ventral anterior nuclear group.
There are other axons that will terminate among upper motor neurons in the Superior
colliculus. Probably not the same axons, but nearby
axons. So, these ascending inputs target the
motor thalamus and the Superior colliculus.
There are also collaterals that will reach yet a different target, the red
nucleus. Pardon me for writing the word red in
blue. But the red nucleus also receives
collaterals from these axons as they make their way through the midbrain on their
way to the thalamus. Well, the motor thalamus then as you
know, will send its inputs to the primary and the pre-motor cortex.
And at this level, we believe that the error correction signals can modulate the
output of the motor cortex. Here's an anatomical view of these
outputs and draw your attention again to our beautiful dentate nucleus here.
So, there are cells that sit in this dentate nucleus that grow axons that
stream out across this beautiful Superior cerebellar peduncle, which is this big
bundle of white matter that we see here and there.
So, we'll call that Superior cerebellar peduncle.
And notice that the decussation is actually outside of the cerebellum in the
upper part of the pons near the junction of the pons and the midbrain and the
axons branch. And terminate, some of them will in this
red nucleus, which we find here in the midbrain.
And then others will terminate up around in this region, the area of the ventral
anterior ventral lateral complex of the thalamus.
So, this decussation then allows the appropriate hemisphere of the cerebellum
to relate back to the upper motor circuits that govern the same part of the
body. Now, let's talk about what we might call
the descending outputs of the cerebellum anatomically descending, not up to the
motor thalamus, but directed towards brainstem targets.
So, recall again that we have our deep cerebellar nuclei near the midline.
We've got the fastigial nucleus and a bit more laterally, we have the dentate and
the interposed nucleus. And for the decending inputs now we focus
mainly on the connections to the reticular formation of the brainstem.
Now, the resitidual nucleus also has some connection to the Superior colliculs but
it's probably not as functionally significant in our brains, as is the
larger output that's coming from the dentate nucleus.
So we'll focus mainly on the right side of this figure to consider these
descending outputs. So again, the major output of concern
here is connections from the medial part of the deep nuclei of the cerebellum to
the reticular formation of the brainstem. And the reticular formation, as you know,
gave rise to projections down to lower motor neurons in the medial part of the
ventral horn of the spinal cord. So, these are motor neurons that are
going to be mainly concerned with posture and the movements of the proximal muscles
of the limbs. Now, I mentioned in our introduction that
the vestibular nuclei are sometimes considered deep cerebellar nuclei that
are displaced out of the cerebellum and into the brainstem.
And here's why. The vestibular nuclei receive input
directly from purkinje cells of the vestibular cerebellum.
And these nuclei then, are in a position that's somewhat similar to these deep
nuclei. Although in this figure, we chose to put
them outside of the cerebellum as they actually fall anatomically, right along
side the reticular formation neurons. So, these vestibular nuclei then give
rise to their own spinal projections, where they helped to maintain balance
under conditions. In which there has been some kind of
acceleration of the head, often associated with a disturbance of postural
control. Well, when you come back for Part 3,
we'll talk about functions and dysfunctions of the cerebellum.