Okay, what I'd like to do now is
introduce this concept of central integration of these visceral sensory
signals. so that the motor output can be
coordinated by higher brain centers in the medial and ventral aspects of the
forebrain. So I want to show you.
Really, it expanded, or maybe you might think of this as an exploded version of
this illustration, that unpacks exactly what these structures are and, how they
relate to the influx of sensory signals. And then the output of our preganglionic
neurons. So this is the last slide that I want to
show you in this part of our tutorial. And trust me, it looks actually much
worse than it really is. let me give you a sense of the
organization of this chart. What we have on the right hand side of
this chart is basically the ascending sensory information that is derived from
our visceral sensory elements. Many of these things we've already
discussed. So our end organs are giving rise to
first order afferents that are rising through cranial nerves 9 and 10, and the
axons of our anterolateral system. And the nucleus of the solitary track
then becomes a very important integrator of this information.
We've already talked about how nucleus and the solitary tract gives rise to
projections that impact our interneurons that organize preganglionic neurons of
the sympathetic parasympathetic divisions in the brain stem and spinal cord.
And this thereby mediates local reflex activity that can alter the activity of
our end organs. So, what I want to introduce to you, is
the idea of a central autonomic network that is processing these ascending
sensory signals and coordinating the output of our visceral motor effector
systems. Through a broad, distributed network of
elements in the ventral medial parts of the fore brain, including some the
encephalitic regions, including the hypothalamus.
A very important structure that I'll talk about next, as well as parts of the brain
stem. So from the nucleus of the solitary
track. Inputs are passed into the reticular
formation of the brain stem. They are also distributed directly to the
hypothalamus and then indirectly to another nucleus of the brain stem called
the parabrachial nucleus. This is found very near the superior
cerebellar peduncle, as it attaches to the upper part of the pons.
Well this parabracial nucleus, then, sends input to the medial parts of the
thalamus to the hypothalamus and the amygdala.
And once this information has access to the thalamus and the amygdala, now it can
be distributed more broadly to the ventral and medial aspects of the
prefrontal cortex. The thalamus and the amygdala have
connections specifically with the insular cortex, and the insular cortex in turn
has interconnections with the rest of the orbital and medial sector of the
prefrontal cortex. which becomes very important in
integrating the sensory signals that are being processed and impacting the motor
output that eventually feeds its way down towards our brain stem and spinal cord
networks of neurons. Well, let me just pause for a moment and
highlight the importance of this insular cortex.
We can think of this insular cortex as being the sensory cortex for the viscera.
So, one aspect of this insular cortex that I think is really interesting is its
capacity to Integrate these visceral signals and then use that information as
a way of informing other kinds of networks that mediate different
dimensions of cognition. So here's an example, let me ask you a
question, how do you feel right now? Well, if you're like me, you may respond
based on information that is derived more so from the viscera than, let's say from
our cutaneous surfaces. Now, of course, you may have a condition
by which your cutaneous surfaces or your muscloskeletal systems really drive the
answer to that question how do you feel. But I think for many of us, that
response, whether we think of it in this, these terms or not, is really derived
from our visceral senses. And that is a signal that is processed
here, in this insular cortex. So, I think this insular cortex is very
important for this notion of feeling. So how do you feel today?
Well, let your insular cortex inform the rest of your cognitive networks as you
consider your reply to that question. All right, well, let's move from the
right side of this figure then, to the left side.
So as the insular has interaction with the rest of the medial and orbital
aspects of the prefrontal cortex. We begin to coordinate and organize our
plan of action. Our governments of our visceral motor
output. And this happens through multiple relays.
Some of which run through the amygdala. And then through the hypothalamus others
enter the amygdala and hypothalamic systems.
And then have more or less direct access to brain stem networks that organize our
preganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons.
Well, eventually, from that level, then, of course, we have our motor outflow to
our ganglionic neurons that can alter the activity of our end organs.
So we might think of this medial prefrontal cortex, then, as the principal
coordinator of outflow that is going to alter, either our homeostatic state, or,
prepare our body for action. That is, for allostasis.
To change the state of the body, in order to, once again restore conditions of
homeostasis. Well, an important mediator then, of
activity from the level of the cortex to these brain stem effector systems, in the
reticular formation and the preganglionic themselves, is this part of the ventral
diencephalon called a hypothalamus. The amygdala is important too, but we'll
talk about that in a later session in the following unit of the course.
I'd like to take a few minutes speaking with you about the hypothalamus, and
highlight for you its key role in integrating visceral sensory signals.
As well as command signals, contextual signals derived from the level of the
cerebral cortex. And then the outflow from the
hypothalamus is largely directed at our visceral motor effective systems as we'll
see in the next part of this tutorial. So if you hang with me we'll move from
this rather lengthy first part of the visceral motor tutorial.
And I want to spend spend some time with you talking about the hypothalamus.
But before we get there, consider the study question, and I think you'll be
ready to move on after that. So, I'll see you in just a minute, and we
will pick up talking about the hypothalamus.