Now let's turn our attention to another
very important sensory element that we find and associate with our muscular
skeletal units, and this is called the Golgi tendon organ.
The Golgi tendon organ and the spinal reflex derived from its sensory signals,
provides us with a system. That monitors the force that's generated
by a contracting muscle. So the stimulus, then, that activates the
Golgi tendon organ is tension, that is, the force that's generated during the
active contraction of the extrafusal muscle fibers.
The Golgi tendon organ is relatively insensitive to the stretch that is
applied to a skeletal muscle, and that's because most of the stretch is absorbed
by the muscle fibers themselves. The Golgi tendon organ is a structure
that's found not in the muscle fiber per se but in the tendon that attaches the
muscle fiber to the skeleton. So what we find in this region of this
musculoskeletal attachment is a set of nerve endings that come from a sensory
axon called the group 1B afferent neuron. And these endings are woven into the
fabric of collagen fibrils that we find here in this region of the tendonous
attachment to a muscle. And this anotomic relation between the
nerve elements and the collagen fibrils make This structure activated as tension
is created. So, as is these muscle fibers contract,
they generate a force that tugs on this region of the golgi tendon organ and that
causes a deformation of these terminals. That are woven in among these collagen
fibrils. And that deformation opens
stretch-sensitive ion channels that result in the influx of cations and the
generation of potentials that if, greater than threshold, can lead to an action
potential that then propagates into the central nervous system.
Now let's look into the spinal cord and see the circuitry that we find that
receives as its incoming sensory information.
Now we can think of this system in operation as a form of negative feedback.
The golgi tendon organ is going to be activated by the tension.
That's generated as the muscle contracts, and the physiological effect of that
sensory signal is going to be to diminish the output of the alpha motor neurons
that supply the contracting muscle, and thereby reduce the amount of tension
that's generated. So this is kind of a negative feedback
system. Now the physiological effect of
activating this golgi tenden organ is that the output to the muscle that's
generating force is going to be diminished and this implies that there
must be some kind of an inhibitory interneuron interpose between the sensory
signal and the alpha motor neuron. And it either is.
This is called the 1B inhibitory inter neuron.
It is a dedicated type of inhibitory inter neuron that is post synaptic to
this 1 B A ferret. And it makes pre-synaptic terminals on
the alpha motor neuron that's responsible for the force its being generated by that
contracting muscle. So as this one BA farent is activating
this 1B inhibitory inter-neuron, there's going to be synaptic inhibition.
And a reduction in the output of that alpha motor neuron.
And this is going to diminish the force or the tension being generated by this
contracting muscle. Now as usual we have a pattern of
reciprocal inner, innervation. such that if we reduce the activity of
the flexor muscle. We're going to actually increase the
activity of the extensor muscle. And this will help stabilize the movement
around this particular joint. And so this happens via disynaptic
excitation of the alpha motor neuron that intervates the extensor muscle.
So on both sets of alpha motor neurons we have an inter neuron, interposed between
the incoming 1B sensory signal and the alpha motor neurons.
However, in one case we have a sign inverting inter-neuron.
That is an inhibitory inter-neuron that takes the excitation coming through the
sensory arc, and turns it into an inhibitory signal that suppresses the
motor output. On the other side, on the exstensor side,
we have an excitatory inter-neuron that conserves the sign of the sensory signal.
That is excitations coming in From the Golgi tendon organ, and that serves to
increase the output of the extensor motor neuron.
Well, what good is this system of Golgi tendon organs?
Well we think it's very useful for monitoring the force that's generated by
an actively contracted muscle. the activity of this 1B afferent is
modulated up or down throughout the course of an active muscle contraction,
and we can imagine that this might be very helpful in combating fatigue that
might be setting in. We can imagine that as a muscle is
fatiguing, it's generating slightly less force that's going to be reducing.
The sensory signal into the spinal cord circuity.
And that would diminish the inhibition then, in the one b inhibitory
inter-neuron. And with less inhibition, this might be a
way of providing for a reflexive increase.
And the activity that would help combat that fatigue that's setting in on the
contracting muscle. We think that this might also be
important if a muscle fiber should be directed by the central nervous system to
generate contractile forces that are potentially damanging.
so this is a form of negative. Feedback that would potentially help
protect the muscle and potentially it's tendonous attachment as well, against
excessive forces that we might otherwise attempt to generate.
Now, like all of our systems of segmental reflexes, the golgi tendon organ reflex
arch is subject to modulation via descending pathways.
these descending pathways certainly facilitate various dynamics of human
movement that we may choose to participate in.
One example might be resistance weight training.
That some of you may be engaged in. Where you might actually want to generate
very large forces of muscle contraction. Perhaps forces that put you at some risk.
And if your Golgi tendon organs are trying to minimize that risk.
You can imagine that these descending inputs might actually facilitate the
achievement of that very large force of muscle contraction.
Certainly any competitive weight lifter. Would have to have a very well exercise
set of descending projections that can interrupt the activity of this Golgi
tendon reflex. Otherwise it would not be possible to
generate the forces necessary to be competitive.