Well, one benefit of the center surround
antagonism is that what these ganglion cells really convey to the brain is a
signal, not so much about the overall illumination of the environment.
But rather, about contrast, about an edge of light that might just be perfectly
dividing the center from the surround region for any one receptive field
structure. Well, with this sensitivity to contrast,
the retina now can respond over a tremendous range of environmental
conditions. What we're looking at here is a plot that
illustrates the dynamic range of the response of a ganglion cell.
And each of these lines here, represent the discharge rate of a ganglion cell over
some range of test spot illumination in the center.
The different lines correspond to these different amounts of background
illumination. And the point here, is that, a ganglion
cell can respond to more than six log units of illumination.
Depending upon the amount of contrast that's present between the center and the
surround. This allows vision to happen under a
remarkably broad range of environmental conditions.
Just as I've been speaking to you in this tutorial, the sun has set.
And, the environmental conditions are much less bright now than they were at the
start of this tutorial. Believe it or not, if I were to look at a
piece of print, the light reflected from the white paper would be less than the
light reflected from the dark print at the start of this tutorial.
So what appeared to be dark when the sun was still up still looks dark to me now,
even though the amount of light that's being reflected is actually considerably
less. And similarly, the white paper still looks
white even though it's now dusky and the sun is going down.
So that's just one example of the functions that are illustrated here in
this curve, where, what's our retinas are really conveying to the brain is contrast
defined by edges of light and shadow. Well, I, I want to show you one example of
this and for this, I'm going to pause just a moment and navigate over to the website
of a good colleague of mine and friend and mentor, Dr.
Dale Purves, who has one of the best websites that pertains to any field of
science available on the World Wide Web. And I would invite you to navigate there
yourself. His website is purveslab.net.
Well, I've just landed on the website of Dr.
Dale Purves, who you'll recognize as being the senior author and senior editor of the
textbook that I've been referring to. Again a good friend and colleague for many
years now here at Duke University and of, and a mentor of mine throughout the last
couple of decades of my career. So I'm going to click on the domain in his
website called SEE FOR YOURSELF. And if we go to SEE FOR YOURSELF, I, I
want to draw your attention to one particular animation here, under the
Lightness/Brightness category. Now hopefully, you can see this dot that's
moving back and forth. It's a circular patch.
And I hope that, as you watch it move, you'll be able to see that there's an
apparent change in the brightness of this circular patch as it passes through what
looks like a bit of a veil or a bit of a fog.
As it moves to the right, we see that it appears to be, dark and as it moves to the
left it appears to be bright. So there, now, it's getting brighter and
then as it moves back to the right, it's getting darker.
I hope that's exactly what you see. So here, it's getting bright.
Now, it's getting dark. Well, I just want to see if you're paying
attention, of course, that's not what I see and I hope that's not what you see.
As it moves to the left, it's getting dark.
You see that? It's getting dark.
Now, it moves back to the right, it's getting bright.
To the left, it's getting dark. To the right, it's getting bright.
Well, this is a demonstration of exactly the functions that I showed you in the
last slide. So there is a change in the background
illumination, and as that happens, our visual system continues to be responsive
to the contrast between the center and the surround.
Now, if you read a little bit more about what Dr.
Purves has to say about this demonstration, he'll tell you that the
physiology of retinal ganglion cells just can't possibly explain this phenomenon.
There must be something deeper in how these signals are processed in the brain
that gives rise to this percept. And he very well, maybe correct about
that. But all of this begins in the retina and
the physiology of the receptor fields of the ganglion cells has much to say about
our ability to detect this patch of gray as it moves across this background
illumination. Now, in case any of you have doubted
whether this is actually a grey spot. This website has this nice little
interactive feature. So here, I can just mask out, the
background. And move this with the spot.
And you can see that, indeed, it's a uniform gray spot that moves across this
field. We can let that pass out and see how
indeed the luminance is a function of the interaction of the spot in the background.
Well, we could spend quite a bit of time here on this website and I would invite
you to do so. I think it's a fascinating set of
demonstrations of visual physiology. And we'll look at a few more in our next
tutorial.