Welcome to this tutorial about
neurotransmitters. We continue to talk about our core
concept, about how neurons communicate through both electrical and chemical
signals, and Last time, we spent our tutorial talking about the nature of the
chemical signals, the neurotransmitters. Now we're going to talk about the
receptors that they interact with. So, we have some learning objectives
today. I want you to be able to discuss the
means by which ligand-gated ion channels affect the membrane potential of
postsynaptic. Neurons.
I want you to be able to compare and contrast the structure and function of
the ligaand-gated ion channels and metabotropic receptors also known as the
G-protein coupled receptors. We're going to focus on one very
particular ligand-gated ion channel that's very important, especially in the
context of learning about neural plasticity.
And I want you to discuss the properties of the NMDA receptor for glutamate and
why it's so important for synaptic plasticity.
And lastly, I want you to be able to once again recount for the factors that
determine the effect of a neurotransmitter on a postsynaptic
neuron. OK.
Well, let's get started again by reviewing the basic structure and
functional properties of a chemical synapse and so those are recounted for
you in figure 5.3, a very important figure from your textbook and what we see
here is what happens when an action potentional invades the pre-synaptic
terminal membrane. So there's a wave of depolarization That
causes voltage gated calcium channels to open, calcium rushes in, to the
pre-synaptic terminal and interacts with[UNKNOWN] that causes the snare
complex, to pull together, the membranes of the synaptic vessicle and the
pre-synaptic terminal, that generates a fusion pore.
And neurotransmitter then can diffuse out of the synaptic vesicle where it can
interact with neurotransmitter receptors on the postsynaptic surface.
That's what we're going to talk about mainly in this tutorial.
And so what we want to understand then are what are the consequences for
activation of a receptor for a neurotransmitter on a post-synaptic cell?
Alright, so that's the challenge for the day.
And I'll just remind you again that we have two classes of neurotransmitters,
our small molecule neurotransmitters and then our peptide neurotransmitters.
And these classes of neurotransmitters interact with two broad classes Of
receptors. So we will talk in length about each
class We will begin with talking about our
ionotropic receptors which are receptors for neurotransmitters that are part of an
ion channel complex. Hence we call these ligon gated ion
channels And there are metabotropic receptors, which are receptors for
neurotransmitters that are not directly part of ion channels.
But rather these receptors trigger a set of metabolic activities, that then might
ultimately result in the opening or closing of separate ion channel
molecules, as well as a variety of other post synaptic activities.
Our small moleule neurotransmitters typically interact with both ionotropic
and metabotropic receptors although that may not be universally true of all small
molecule transmitters. Certainly our major important
neurotransmitters like glutamate and GABA interact with receptors from both
categories. Whereas our peptide neurotransmitters.
Interact with metabotropic receptors. Okay, so let's begin to consider what
exactly these receptors are and consider their structure and functional
properties. So let's begin by considering the
ligand-gated ion channels. So, as I said the essential Relationship
here to understand is that the actual receptor sites themselves that interact
with the neuro-transmitters, are part of an ion channel complex.
Okay? So the receptor is part of the same
molecular structure that forms the ion channel.
And because of this, these are the receptor interactions that mediate the
most rapid effects on postsynaptic currents.
So as we go, I'll remind you that in order to understand the effect of any
given neurotransmitter substance, whatever it may be.
What we really need to know is something about the receptor to which that
neurotransmitter bites. And we need to know something about what
other receptors might also be present in the same post synaptic cell in order to
understand the physiology of that transmitter molecule.
So we'll see examples of that as we go along here in this tutorial.
Alright, so let's consider the general molecular structure of ligand-gated ion
channels, and we'll use the ligand-gated ion channel that we know best as an
example. That would be the nicitonic acetylcholine
receptor. So this is the receptor for the
endogenous neurotransmitter acetylcholine That is also occupied and activated by
nicotine. So this structure has a characteristic
set of sub units that come together to comprise this ionotropic receptor.
Typically there are five sub units that come together to form the functional
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Each sub unit has an N terminus domain to
it that binds the actual neurotransmitter, acetylcholine.
So, the N terminus is out here somewhere. In the extracellular space.
Attached to that end terminus is some number of membranes spanning helical
regions and then there is some kind of cytoplasmic extension that often is a
site where the receptor sub units can interact with metabolates and other kinds
of molecules. Within the cytoplasm of the cell.
So that's just one sub unit, a functional channel requires the aggregation of
multiple sub units, typically four or five.
Here in this example we see five sub units that have aggregated two alpha sub
units, a beta sub unit, a delta and a gamma sub unit.
And they all differ slightly in their molecular structures.
But together they aggregate to form a central pore that contains the filters
that result in the selectivity of this ion channel.
Now as a class inotropic receptors are not as selective as our voltage gated ion
channels are. So as we'll see, multiple ions can pass
through the pore of this channel. Now what makes this a ligongated ion
channel is the fact that channel opening is gated by the binding of the
neurotransmitter to its receptor. So this ion channel is not particularly
voltage sensitive, it doesn't have a voltage sensor motif among its membrane
spanning domains, rather the gating mechanism is modified by the interaction
of the transmitter with the receptor. That induces a conformational change that
opens The pore of the channel allowing for the passage of ions.
Now there are a variety of important examples of ionotropic receptors that
we'll be talking about throughout the course.
I've just been talking about the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.
There's a family of receptors for glutamate that are in the ionotropic
category. There's a receptor, named AMPA, for the
pharmacological agent that best activates that receptor.
Likewise there is a receptor called the NMDA receptor N methyl D aspartate
receptor, and another one called the Kainate receptor, all named...
For the exogenous ligands. Of course the endogenous ligand for all
three is glutemate. There's the receptor for the principal
inhibitory neural transmitter of the brain, called GABA, gamma aminobutyric
acid there're actually a variety of GABA receptors.
here are shown some of the sub-units that come together to form what's called the
GABA A receptor channel complex and so on.
Receptors for glycine, for serotonin, and then for the purinergic transmitters such
as adenosine Now, what you'll notice from this chart here is that there are
multiple subunits that can come together to form an ion channel and combinations
of subunits can form channels that have slightly different kinetic properties
with respect to channel opening and closing.
or, perhaps different kinds of modulatory sites that are presented to the
cytoplasmic surface. Or perhaps different affinities for the
endogenous ligands. So one can have different kinds of
functional properties result from the aggregation of different kinds of
subunits, that come together to form The entire receptor channel complex.
Let's look a bit more closely at one important ionotropic receptor.
And that is the receptor for the inhibitory neuro-transmitter GABA.
So, what we're looking here what we're looking at here is The typical GABA A
receptor channel and it's comprised of five subunits that come together, in this
case an alpha, two beta subunits, a gamma, perhaps a delta or another alpha
that have come together here. And like the nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor these five. Five subunits aggregate to form a pore,
through which ions may pass. But what I want you to notice here, is
really the complexity of this ion channel.
there's a variety of binding sites for other substances that can modulate,
The efficiency at which these channels open or close.
for example, there is a site for the binding of steroids.
For the binding of barbiturate drugs many of our pills that we take at bedtime that
can modify the way people fall asleep are acting at a site deep within this
receptor complex here. There are sites on the extra-cellular
side that likewise can modulate the flux of current through these channels.
Again drugs that are useful pharmacologically and are important drugs
in the medical armamentarium and a variety of other binding sites for drugs
that are not illustrated here, including alcohol.
Now this particular ionotropic receptor allows for the passage of chloride ions.
So chloride ions pass through a selectivity filter here which are
favorable for this monovalent anion to pass down it's concentration gradient as
illustrated here that concentration gradient is shown inside the cell to
outside the cell. Which is typical of an immature neuron as
we'll talk about in a little while. Now, let's talk about the currentst that
pass through lignad-gated ion channels. And in order ot understand the principles
involved we need to revisit Ohm's law. So you will recall that we talked about
Ohm's law. As a being V equals IR and we, we were
able to rearrange that in terms of current and indicated that current equals
the inverse of resistance which is the conductance term times V.
And that V term we could expand In terms of the driving force for a permeant ion
as a difference between the membrane potential and the reversal potential for
the permeant ion. So we can apply the very same priniciples
to the movement of ions through a ligand gated ion channel What's different here,
is that the channel is gated, not by voltage, but by the binding of a
neurotransmitter to it's receptor. So when we do that, what we see is that
the current which, here, is called PSC , for Post Synaptic Current.
Is equal to the ligand-gated conductance, the g term, times the driving force.
Now, if the conductance of this channel happens to be greater than zero this is
what would happen when a neuro-transmitter binds.
Then we would expect there to be current. Provided that we have driving force, if
there is no driving force, that is if the membrane potential is precisely the
reversal potential for the active conductants.
Then even though we may have a significant value of conductants then
there will be no post synaptic current, if the driving force term equals zero.
Okay. Now, I want us to consider how this
version of Ohm's law applies to understanding the conductance of the
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor that we have at our end plates on our muscle
fibers. So let's turn our attention to the
neuromuscular junction, so this is the place where our alphamotor neurons
synapse upon our skeletal muscle fiber. As illustrated over to the right.
And what we see here is an axon that makes contact with a muscle fiber.
And we can experiment upon this prepration.
I'd like to take you through some data that are derived from such experiements.
So notice that we can stimulate the axon with a micro-electrode we can voltage
clamp the muscle fiber with a voltage clamp amplifier so we could measure the
membrane potential, we can pass current to establish whatever membrane potential
is of interest to the experimenter. And so what we're looking at here is a
recording of end plate currents. So this is a, kind of a post synaptic
current recorded from a muscle fiber. And notice that the muscle fiber is
voltage clamped at different levels. from a rather hyperpolarized potential of
110 millivolts. All the way up through an extreme
depolarized potential of plus 70 millivolts.
And when we first look at the extreme hyperpolarization, what we find is that
there is a significant inward current. So again negative current here by
convention is an inward current carried by a cation.
So with 110 millivolts, of hyperpolarization, stimulating this axon
leads to a strong inward current. If we cut that hyperpolarization in
roughly half, and now set the membrane potential to minus 60 millivolts We have
about half as much inward current flowing into that muscle fiber.
Now notice what happens when we voltage clamp to zero millivolts.
We see essentially no curret at all in this muscle fiber when we stimulate the
axon. So, keep that in mind.
And finally, if we are to depolarize the muscle fiber to plus 70 millivolts and
then stimulate the axon, what we see is not an inward current at all, but an
outward current. So this behavior should look somewhat
familiar to you because we saw similar behavior when we considered the impact of
membrane potential. On the currents that pass through voltage
gated ion channels, only here the ion channel's gated not by voltage but by the
binding of[UNKNOWN] to its receptor. So not for example, that we have inward
currents at hyper polarized potential, outward currents at depolarized potential
And no net current at 0 millivolts. So that should, prehaps give you some
insight, as to what might be the currents that are flowing through this ion
channel. Now, in order to help you think through
that, I want you to be able to relate our version of Ohms law, that we're
revisiting here. In the context of looking at end plate
currents at the neuromuscular junction, and I want you to think about the
following set of study questions that you're about to see.
And they're also prepared for you at the end of the tutorial notes.
So why don't you take a few minutes now, and pause the recording, and consider the
following set of study questions.