Let's turn now from the post-cranial body
to the face, the anterior two-thirds or so of the head, and ask, what's the pathway that serves mechano-sensation
for the face? Well, that pathway is called the trigeminal lemniscus pathway, or sometimes
we call it the pathway of the chief or principle
nucleus of the trigeminal complex. And I'll explain why we call it the trigeminal
lemniscus in just a moment. So again, it's a three neuron pathway. From skin to cortex. Okay. Note, that conservation, of the basic
organization of the pathway. So the first order neuron, is a ganglion
cell, only now it's in the ganglion of the
trigeminal nerve. It enters the brain stem through the
trigeminal nerve, which as you should recall, plunges right through the
transverse fibers on the ventrolateral surface of the pons. At that level, we find our second order
neuron, which resides in a nucleus of the trigeminal complex called
the principle nucleus, or the chief sensory
nucleus. The second order neuron grows an axon, that crosses the mid line, and ascends the
remaining divisions of the brain stem, the upper pons and the mid brain, and enters the ventral posterior complex of
the thalamus. This pathway we call the trigeminal
lemniscus. And it essentially forms near the medial
edge of the medial lemniscus. And I'll show you that in just a little
bit. Okay, so the third order neuron then, is in a division
of the somatic sensory thalamus that we call the ventral
posterior medial nucleus, or VPM. So VPL was for the medial lemniscus. The VPM is the target of the trigeminal
lemniscus. You should know where these neurons in the
ventral posterior medial nucleus project. They project to the postcentral gyrus, but they project to the inferior one-third
of that postcentral gyrus. And as they do, they provide a beautiful
somatotopic map of the face across this inferior segment
of the postcentral gyrus. So, the somatotopy that we see at the
level of the cortex really reflects the way the VPL and the VPM map
into that cortical to main. Okay, well let's turn our attention now
from our system that makes us aware of our light touch sensations and our vibration
sensations and our position sensations, to the kind of
sensory feedback. Derived from the movements of our
musculoskeletal units that serve to coordinate the ongoing
control of movement. And what I'm referring to now is the role of this important part
of the brain that we'll talk about in a couple of
weeks, the cerebellum. The cerebellum, I like to think of as an
organ of agility. It helps to facilitate agile movements of
body and agile movements of thought. With respect to the body, the cerebellum
gets inputs from the cortex about what we are
trying to do. And the cerebellum gets feedback from our sensory systems about what we are actually
doing. And if there's a problem, as there quite
often is, then the cerebellum will generate an error signal that is sent back
into our motor system for an adjustment so that some
correction can be made as we, as we execute a voluntary movement. So, we think of this as real time, ongoing
coordination of voluntary movement. Now, what I want to address is the means
by which this cerebellum gets information
about how we are actually moving. One important source will be our
mechano-sensory systems. That supply the spinal cord. So there is a pathway that runs up the
spinal cord connecting to the brain stem via one of the three peduncles, one of the
three stalks of white matter attachment. And what I'm referring to specifically is
the inferior cerebellar peduncle. So, let's look at this pathway. We consider this pathway part of our
spinal cerebellar systems. So, these are spinal cerebellar pathways.
So, the receptor here is going to be a
proprioceptor. So its a muscle spindle afferent, a Golgi
tendon organ, a joint receptor. One of those receptors that's stimulated
when we move our musculo-skeletal units. The first order neuron is a dorsal root
ganglion cell and its central axon enters the spinal cord and, as we'll see
in a few weeks, gives rise to some local
collaterals in the ventral horn. That are important for things like the
myotactic reflex or the knee jerk reflex. But, what I want to focus on here is the
central projection. So, if we're talking about an afferent
from the lower body. Then the first order axon enters the
dorsal column and ascends to the thoracic spinal
cord. There, there is a synaptic connection on a
nucleus of the intermediate gray matter of the thoracic
spinal cord called Clarke's nucleus. It's also called the dorsal nucleus of
Clarke, so either term is fine, Clarke's nucleus,
dorsal nucleus of Clarke. Okay, I think I want to make an
interjection here, and it's based on an experience with the first one
we had through medial neuroscience, where some students
were concerned about my declaration that the dorsal-nucleus Clarke
is a nucleus of the thoracic spinal cord. And, yet we're looking at a slide that
shows a cross section through the lumbar spinal
cord with Clarke's nucleus. Now, I know that is a small point, but
perhaps it's worth clarifying.
Clarke's nucleus extends throughout the thoracic spinal cord, and then to the
upper lumbar levels of the spinal cord. So, this figure actually is perhaps not
ideal, but it's also not misleading. There is a caudal extension of Clarke's
nucleus in the lumbar cord, so it's perfectly fine that we use the
lumbar cord for illustration. But I do want you to associate Clarke's nucleus primarily with the
thoracic cord. And let's just not be concerned with the
inferior limit, whether it's L2, L3, or somewhere
in that region. I'd be more pleased that you look for
Clarke's nucleus in the thoracic cord and let's just leave
it at that. And otherwise.
Let's continue with this tutorial. From there, Clarke's nucleus gives rise to
a second order projection that runs in the dorsal lateral
white matter of the spinal cord. This is called the dorsal spinocerebellar
tract. And this pathway runs right on into the cerebellum via the inferior cerebellar
peduncle. So this is a pathway that serves the lower extremity. Now you may be wondering about the upper
extremity. Well, the upper extremity is served by a
pathway that runs in parallel. So again, first order neurons, or dorsal
root ganglion cells, and the axons enter
through the dorsal root entry zone, but rather than
reaching Clarke's nucleus in the thoracic cord,
these axons ascend in the dorsal column.
And from there, they interact with a nucleus, that is external to the dorsal
column nuclei we've already discussed. It's called the external cuneate nucleus,
external cuneate nucleus. Not shown here in this illustration, but
it's shown in the next illustration. And the external cuneate nucleus then is the second order neuron that
projects to the cerebellum information about the
upper extremity. Okay, so Clarke's nucleus is concerned
with the lower extremity, external cuneate nucleus is
concerned with the upper extremity. Now, here's an illustration from my friend
and colleague here at Duke Doctor Nell Kent,
where she has tried to put this pathway, this
Spinocerebellar pathway, together with the dorsal column
medial lemniscal system. And what we see, is that propioceptive
information derived from things like muscle spindles,
golgi tendon organs, enters the spinal cord via projections that run through the
dorsal nucleus of Clarke. Through the lower extremity or the external cuneate nucleus for the upper
extremity. And, then from there, the pathways enter the cerebellum via the inferior cerebellar
peduncle. ICP for short. Now, as we move our bodies in space, we do have some concious awareness of
those movements. In fact, the movements of our body in
space are part of what consitutes our body schema or
body image. So that implies that there must be a way for this information to also enter
conscious experience. And there's some concern as to exactly how
this happens in the human nervous system, so we don't have a
definitive picture of this quite yet, but I think a provisional answer can
be that it's these pathways, the dorsal spinocerebellar pathway and the pathway
from the external cuneate nucleous. As they arise to enter the cerebellum,
they give off collaterals and those collaterals seem to
synapse upon neurons, that are either in our dorsal column nuclei, or
very near them. And from there, the neurons around the
region of the dorsal column nuclei grow axons that contribute
to the medial lemniscal pathway. And this allows these proprioceptive
signals derive from these final cerebellar relays to also enter our
pathway for conscience awareness. Okay, well, we will say much more about
this final cerebellar pathways when we talk about the cerebellum
in a few weeks. Now what I'd like to do is transition to sylvius and show you what these pathways
actually look like. As we ascend from the spinal cord all the
way up through the brain stem.