>> Welcome to one of my favorite places
associated with Duke University. This is one of several entrances to
something called the Duke Forest, which is about 7,000 acres of land
that's managed by Duke University, right adjacent to the campus
of Duke University. So this is land that is set up for
research, for education, and just for management of this
beautiful amazing pine and hardwood forests that we have
here in central North Carolina. I just love this place. So much so, that I come here
every Saturday morning and just run the trails and the fire road,
like what we have here. And I've encouraged my students
over the years to do the same. Not that I'm a fitness nut or
anything like that. But I do enjoy running for fitness,
and certainly would encourage all of you to be physically fit and
as active as you can be just for the amazing benefits that physical
fitness can have in your life. So what does this have to do
with medical neuroscience? Well, when I teach my
students here on campus, I always invite them to join me
on these Saturday morning runs. And a few of them actually do. So I decided to help make this
sound a little bit more fun and appealing, that I would call this
Saturday morning run a Neur-Run. Little play on words there. Neuron being the principle unitary element in the nervous system that
does the business of the nervous system. Not to downplay the important role of
glial cells, but you get the idea. The neuron is an important
component of the nervous system. So just replace those final three letters
with the word run and you get neurun. So here's the deal. I tell my students come meet at eight
o'clock Saturday morning right here, and we'll have about a five
mile run through the forest. We've gotta run slow enough so
that we can stay together. We can have conversation. Basically, we can run in
community with one another. Secondly, we want to be able
to have some discussion about the things that we're
working on during the course. So I never have any problem with
what is my second rule, that is, talking about something that's
happening in the course. But I usually have some
trouble with the first. That is, keeping up with some of my
students who are a lot younger than me and a lot faster and in better condition. But they humor me,
they run with the old guy. So, we typically have just a great
time together on Saturday morning. It's a good chance to get to know
students outside of the classroom. And I wanted to give you a little bit
of that sense of experience as well. So here we are, Saturday morning,
the Duke Forest. I'm a little early, so
no other students have arrived yet. But I think I better get
the blood pumping a little bit. So I'm going to go do
a little bit of warmup now. Well, if you're ever in Durham,
North Carolina, look me up and consider joining me for
one of these Saturday morning neuruns. Gotta run.