Welcome back to part three of this
tutorial on the cerebellum. I'd like to say a little bit more about
the functions of the cerebellum and then talk to you some about disfunctions of
cerebellar circuits. So my learning objectives are that you
would discuss the means by which circuitry in the cerebellum aids to
increase the success of volitional motor performance.
And I want you to be able to describe the clinical signs and symptoms associated
with cerebellar damage. Well, let me first summarize both the
anatomy and also now the function of these cerebellar circuits.
And I'll reinforce for you our functional division of the cerebellum into a medial
spinal cerebellum, a lateral cerebrocerebellum, and an inferior lobe
that we call the vestibulocerebellum. So beginning with the largest of these
divisions, the cerebrocerebellum. The cerebrocerebellum includes much of
the hemispheres of the cerebellar cortex that we can appreciate when we see the
cerebellum in the human brain. And these hemispheres send connections
into the dentate nucleus down, in the deep white matter of the cerebellum.
The dentate nucleus sends its output through that superior cerebellar
peduncle, up to the circuitry of the motor thalamus that engages our premotor
and motor cortex. And we think that this part of the
cerebellum is especially concerned with coordinating, organizing, perhaps even
planning the skilled execution of behavior that we do with our hands and
our feet. So, the connections suggest that this may
be the case because the output of the dentate neucleus is largely engaging
circuits that will impact the functions of the premotor cortex.
The spinal cerebellum sends its inputs down to the more medial parts of the deep
cerebellar nuclei engaging the interposed and the fastigial nuclei.
The interposed nuclei are growing connections that impact the motor
thalamus and can in turn directly affect the output of the motor cortex.
but the interposed nuclei together with the fastigial nuclei are also growing
axons into the brain stem reticular formation.
So we think that together these inputs are governing the execution of behavior
more so than the planning for the skilled performance of what we do with the distal
extremities. So it's a fine distinction there, perhaps
one not worth making. But at least, anatomically speaking, we
associate the spinal cerebellum more with the control of, let's say, the more
proximal parts of our limbs, together with our postural muscles, and our
muscles that we use for locomotion. Whereas the cerebral cerebellum, we
associate with the activities that are guided by the premotor cortex, that are
especially involved with the skilled behaviors that we do with our hands and
our feet. And that leaves us with the
vestibulocerebellum. That flocullar nodular lobe that is
directly connected with the vestibular nuclear complex of the brainstem.
This nuclear complex, as you know, is mainly concerned with the feedback
adjustment of posture given signals that are associated with the accelerations of
the head. And these adjustments typically help to
stabalize our posture against some unanticipated disturbance.
So this has been a summary of the anatomy that gives you a sense of what aspects of
motor control the cerebellum might have an influence over.
let me give you a little more of a sense of exactly what that nature of that
influence might be. So, when you think about the function of
the cerebellum, I want you to think of coordination.
The coordination of sequenced movement, or multi-jointed movement, when it comes
to our extremities. When it comes to those domains of
planning, perhaps even those domains of reasoning and problem solving, we can
think of the influence of the cerebellum as helping to coordinate the sequences of
events. That are necessary for planning an act or
for solving a problem and the key operative word is coordination.
So the cerebellum as it coordinates these activies it can help to improve the
stabilbity of our actions as well as their fluidity.
the cerebellum has a role to play in dampening down the oscillations that
might have as flexor and extensor muscles are coordinated by lower motor circuits.
As the cerebellum is serving to correct errors in motor performance, it can also
play a role in improving motor performance over time through the accrual
of experience. And in this way, the cerebellum can
assist motor circuitry in motor learning. Because after all, correcting errors is
exactly what is necessary for motor learning to occur.
The cerebellum may not necessarily be a sight where skill is stored.
But it seems to be a necessary circuit that is engaged in the process of
improving performance and thereby acquiring the skill in the first place.
One of the most amazing facts of cerebellar base plasticity that I've
learned about is how specific that plasticity can be.
we can do a pretty simple demonstration and, in fact, I, I hope to show you this
demonstration. to make available for you a video
recording of, one of my experiments in action that involves plasticity.
And how our visual world is mapped onto our, map of motor output or motor
intention. And this would involve the task of
throwing a ball at a target. And what we can demonstrate is that, the
plasticity that takes place. The learning that takes place under
experimental conditions can be specific for not only the motor structure that is
being used, the arm of the thrower but also the program itself, that is the way
that arm is used. So we can show plasticity of, let's say,
an overhand throw, but not an underhand throw.
Same muscles, same joints, roughly the same kind of sequence.
But the details of how that multi jointed movement is sequenced to perform an
overhand versus an underhand throw differ.
And it seems to be at that level of the organization of the motor program for
movement, that the motor learning takes place, or the adaptation occurs.
So, a remarkable degree of specificity and, what the cerebellum is actually
operating upon to change. Now it's quite interesting to think that
maybe something similar is happening in the domain of cognition.
We know that the dentate nucleus sends connections not just to the motor
thalamus, but also to more medial parts of the thalamus that send connections to
the prefrontal cortex. This suggests that perhaps the
coordination, that is the agility that the cerebellum provides for movement of
body might also apply to movement of mind.
And one interesting clinical observation has been that patients with cerebellar
injuries often fail in problem solving when it requires a sequential procedure.
Perhaps you've seen some simple board games or peg games that require
implementation of a strategy that involves moving in one step, followed by
another, followed by another and another. Well, people with cerebellar injuries
while they are able to execute the motor steps that will be required of the game.
What they seem to lack is the capacity to sequence through what one step will lead
to, and the scenario that the next step will provide.
So it's a matter of sequence and coordination of our problem solving
faculty that seems to be impaired in patients with legions in certain parts of
the lateral hemispheres of the cerebellum.
So, I say that just to emphasize that the cerebellum coordinates movements of the
body. And it also seems to assist in
coordinating movements of the mind. So it should not be surprising that
clinical populations with cerebella injuries may have deficits in the
cognitive domain as they may in the domain of motor control.
So, what are those deficits? Well, if the cerebellum is principally
concerned with governing the ipsilateral side fo the body, then we would expect
deficits to be observed in movements of the ipsilateral side of the body.
So the important principle for you to appreciate here, is that the clinical
signs of cerebellar lesions are always ipsilateral to that lesion.
Now, this stands in contrast to what you have learned about damage to upper motor
neurons. Where the clinical signs and symptoms are
going to be contra lateral to the location of the injury.
As I've been saying the cerebellum represents the ipsilateral side of the
body. And perhaps this reflects the fact that
the spinocerebellar pathways are set up to provide ipsilaterial input.
Now, when it comes to Cerebellar dysfunction.
we would expect there to be an incoordination of movement.
We call this ataxia. An ataxia can be further characterized by
the clinicians. I won't get into that now but just know
that may be coming. If you are getting deeper into the
neurological sciences. but there are other aspects of, this
picture that I do want to talk about. One of them is intentional tremor, so
patients who have damage to the cerebellum they tend to have tremulous
movement when they are intending to move. Such as, if they were to reach out to
grab an object, there is a tremulous movement that reflects an unsteadiness or
an incoordination across those joints. There may be an instability of the limb
as it approaches a target, it may undershoot the target or it may overshoot
that target if one were to reach out to grasp something.
So, there is a dysmetria which refers to a, a lack of gauging, the distance that
is required to accurately execute a motor skill.
There may be an impairment of alternating movements that is sometimes tested in the
clinic. one should be able to alternately, rotate
around the wrist at a fairly rapid rate. And if there is either a breakdown in
rhythm or a reduction in speed, then perhaps that suggests that there may be a
problem in the governance of that motion via the cerebellum.
And then finally, there can be a decomposition of movement.
Rather than a smooth coordination across multiple joints, and let's say a visually
guided reach, there may be a breaking down of that motion into component parts.
So there can be a decomposition of that smooth coordination, or that smooth
sequencing of action across these joints. I'd like to leave you with a short clip
that we recorded in the lab when we encountered a brain that seemed to show
evidence of degeneration of the anterior part of the vermis.
That is fairly characteristic in individuals that have abused alcohol for
many years in their life. So, one of the most common cerebellar
dysfunctions you may see if you're heading into the healthcare world is
alcoholic cerebellar atrophy. And this can result in an impairment of
the functions that are performed by the medial parts of the cerebellum involving
the vermis in the cortex that's lateral to the vermis.
This seems to be the region of the cerebellum that degenerates with chronic
alcohol abuse, for reasons that are not entirely understood.
But when one thinks of this part of the cerebellum, I hope you should now
recognize this as the spinal cerebellum. Which is that portion of the cerebellum
that is going to be especially concerned with the proximal limb muscles that are
important for walking, for posture. And this is likely what explains the
staggering gait that is characteristic of individuals that are chronic abusers of
alcohol. They may be staggering not because
they're inebriated, but because they've suffered this kind of medial impair,
medial damage to their cerebellar hemispheres as you are about to see.
Now I want to show you the cerebellum from what is likely a normal brain in
order to compare with this specimen that we have in front of us.
So, here we have a cerebellum from an individual who died without neurological
complication. And I want you to notice how tight and
full are these tiny little branches or folia that form the cortex of the
cerebellum. In contrast, this other brain has an
unusual amount of space between the folia of the cerebellum.
These spaces are indicative of one particular pathology that seems to result
in the atrophy of this interior and medial part of the cerebellum and that
condition is chronic alcohol abuse. So, although I do not know these
individuals from whom these brains were obtained nor do I know their medical
history. The appearance of the cerebellum in this
specimen is highly indicative of chronic alcoholism compared to what we see in a
healthy looking cerebellum. And this alcohol abuse that I suspect
might have afflicted this particular brain, is likely to have impaired the
coordination of gait and other aspects of locomotion in this individual in life.