Welcome back to our study of the Chemical
Senses and in this tutorial, I'd like to talk to you about the sense of taste or
in more formal terms what we call a Gustation.
So this conversation about our chemical senses again illustrates the complexity
of the human brain. And it allows us to, once again, discover
circuitry in the brain that is genetically determined and provides the
foundation for function in the central nervous system.
And the circuits are modifiable through life experience and that's the topic
we'll get to in more detail when we consider the changing brain in Unit 5.
My learning objectives for discussion on gustation are first to characterize the
peripheral and central organization of the gustatory system.
I want us to again focus on the issue on sensory transduction and understand how
that occurs with in our sensory neurons in our taste buds.
And thirdly, I'd like for you to be able to discuss the means by which information
is coded within the gustatory system. Well, let's begin with a broad anatomical
view of our gustatory pathways. So, gustation, or a sense of taste begins
in the oropharynx. And what we find are sensory cells
associated with an anatomical structure that we'll consider in more detail in
just a few minutes, called the taste bud. And these, taste buds, allow for the
presentation of ingested molecules. Many of them are water-soluble, some of
them are lipids. but, in any event, they interact with the
apical surfaces of our taste cells where they generate electrical signals through
a process of sensory transduction. So we're going to want to understand
exactly how that occurs. Well, at the base of these sensory cells,
there's a synaptic connection with an afferent axon and that axon comes from
one of three cranial nerves. And so, those cranial nerves in question
are nerves VII, IX and X. So, there is a ganglion cell associated
with each of these cranial nerves that grows a peripheral axon out to various
regions in the oropharynx where we have taste buds.
And as we'll see these are of course on the tongue as I think you all know but,
there are also taste buds on the epiglottis.
And taste buds that perhaps or even more posterior back in the Pharynx.
So these axons of cranial nerves VII, IX and X, project into the brain stem.
And once they are in the brain stem they synapse with a nucleus of the brain stem.
That we call the nucleus of the solitary tract.
So, we're going to want to see this nucleus in just a bit of detail.
that nucleus then receives this first order information and in that nucleus, we
have cells that grow axons that project from the brain stem on up into the
thalamus. So in the thalamus then, is where we
would find our third, order neurons in this pathway.
So the nucleus as a solitary track would be second order, and then the thalamic
neurons are the third order. An once again, our thalamic relay is in
the ventral and posterior part of the thalamus.
But not the exact same cells that we considered when we talked about somatic
sensation. For gustation, it's a nearby population
of cells and a slightly different part of this broader ventral posterior thalamic
complex. But we can just consider this part of the
Ventral posterior complex of the thalamus.
Well, those third order neurons then provide input into the Insular cortex.
there are probably several zones within the insular cortex that receive this
input, so these are regions that we might call primary gustatory cortex or
sometimes we just call them the insular taste regions.
Insular taste cortex is how it's labeled in this figure and then, in a more
rostral position, the frontal taste cortex which is really still just part of
the insular cortex. As you will recall from our studies of
brain anatomy, the insula is that part of the cortex that ends up being folded and
covered by the gyrus that forms the upper part of the temporal lobe.
And then the gyri that form the lower part of the frontal and parietal lobes.
Specifically, the superior temporal gyrus from the temporal lobe, and from the
frontal lobe the inferior frontal gyrus, the inferior part to the precentral
gyrus. And then just a little bit into the
parietal lobe, the inferior part of the postcentra gyrus.
So, this is where we find our taste receptive neurons, at the level of the
cerebral cortex, for the first time in cortical processing.
Well, to carry the story onward, I think we will appeal to more schematic
representation so that you can understand perhaps little bit more about what
happens to this information about taste. So in this schema, we again show our
cranial nerves. So here's Cranial nerve VII, Cranial
nerve IX, Cranial nerve X. Representing taste buds that are
distributed in different parts of the oropharynx.
All of this information converges in the brain stem in this Nucleus of the
solitary tract. Well, I'd like to take just a moment and
actually show you that nucleus. So if you have your version of Sylvius
accessible, you may want to pull that up, or otherwise just follow along here.
Well, I've just opened my copy of Sylvius to the brainstem Atlas, perhaps you've
done the same. And what we're looking for now, is the
nucleus of the solitary tract. Well, this is a rather long, rod-shaped
nucleus that spans the junction of the pons and the medulla.
So to find that nucleus, we need to, get at the appropriate sections.
So I'm just going to click down from the level of the mid-brain into the pons.
So now we're in the upper pons, through the middle of the pons, and as we get
into the region of the junction between the pons and the medulla, this is
actually the upper part of the medulla. What I'm going to be looking for, is
something that we sometimes described as a bullseye, that is a dark spot of
heavily myelinated fibers surrounded by a lighter region, which would be gray
matter. So, if we look right in this dorsal
lateral aspect of the tegmentum of the brain stem, we see something that well,
if you use your imagination, maybe you can imagine this as being something of a
bull's eye. So if I clear my drawing for just a
moment and let Sylvius do the work, here. This central dark region, is what we call
the solitary tract. This, represents the, central process of
those first order afferents that have entered the brain stem through Cranial
nerves VII, IX and X, and are making their way down to the appropriate level
of the nucleus. Now the nucleus, actually surrounds the
tract. So, notice how, anatomically this is a
bit different than our, perhaps more familiar tract in nucleus, which is our
spinal trigeminal tract, and spinal trigeminal nucleus.
And the trigeminal system, the tract is just lateral to the nucleus, which is
just medial. But in the solitary system, the tract is
completely engulfed by the cells that are receiving the synaptic input from those
first order afferents. Now, there's another important
distinction I'd like to make about this nucleus of the solitary tract.
there are really two major parts to it. There is a rostral part and a caudal part
to this nucleus. The part of this nucleus that is
receiving gustatory information is actually the rostral part.
So we would encounter this division of the nucleus at roughly this level.
The upper part of the medulla and then, on up into the caudal part of the pons,
and that's pretty much where we lose it. So we've, we've lost the nucleus now that
we are at least a few millimeters into the pons.
But as we get very close to the junctional region, now we see this
nucleus of the solitary tract, and there's our solitary tract, still more or
less engulfed by the gray matter. So the rostral part of this nucleus is
the gustatory relay. Now there's a caudal part to this
nucleus, and if we follow this nucleus down into the medulla just a little bit
further we would continue to follow this for some distance.
The caudal part of this nucleus is actually receiving input from the
viscera. It's a visceral sensory integrator and it
makes perhaps good sense that our sense of taste would be received in a gray
matter structure that also has a caudal division that receives input from out
viscera. Because taste and visural sensations are
awfully intimately intergrated. imagine, experiencing the wonderful
flavors of a palatable meal. and having those sensations integrated
within the sensory signals that are being derived from that gastrointestinal system
that does the work of digestion. Well, sometimes it, it works the other
way, right? Sometimes we have a flavor, a gustatory
sensation that is signaling the presence of a harmful taste, a harmful substance
that we've just ingested into our mouth. So, it's important to get rid of that
harmful substance. We do that through various means, we can
spit out from our mouth. The morsel that we may have just taken
in, or if we've already swallowed it, then we actually would benefit from
vomiting out that substance. Well, it's as if the nucleus of the
solitary tract is a key center for integrating both taste and visceral
sensation. And the nucleus of the solitary tract has
important outputs to circuits in the brain stem that govern some of these
actions, like gagging or coughing or spitting, and even vomiting.
Well, we'll talk more about our visceral sensory and visceral motor functions when
we get deeper into unit four. So stay tuned for that.
Okay, so just to summarize again this anatomy.
The nucleus of the solitary tract is an important integrator of gustatory signals
in the rostal division of the nucleus, which is what we're saying here at this
level. Whereas the caudal division is an
important integrator of visceral sensory signals.