Welcome back to the next part of our
tutorial, on the Visceral Motor System. In this session I want to focus on the
hypothalamus. So again, our discussion relates to the
complexity of the brain and some of the circuitory of the brain that is
genetically determined. And it provides the foundation for the
operations of the, of the elements of the nervous system that are the focus of this
session. And for us it's going to be the circuitry
of the hypothalamus. So my learning objective for you in this
session is that I want you to be able to describe the organization of the
hypothalamus. And identify several functions associated
with key hypothalamic nuclei. Well, we concluded the first part of our
visceral motor tutorial by focusing in on this central autonomic network and we
talked about the Ascending aspects of sensory signals that
are derived from the viscera, and how they are integrated within this central
automomic network. And the outflow back down to our visceral
motor end organs is coordinated in a large measure by this key structure in
the ventral part of the diencephalon called the hypothalamus.
So I think it will be well worth your time to just think we me for a few
minutes about the hypothalamus structure. And then the myriad functions associated
with the circuits that are localized to different structures that are part of the
hypothalamus. Okay, so with that as our context, let's
look at the anatomy of the hypothalamus. So I'll just remind you with this
midsagittal view of the human brain that the hypothalamus is found in the ventral
aspect of the diencephalon. And in a somewhat anterior position.
Now I've drawn a triangle here because this is roughly the region where we find
the hypothalamus. So this triangle is essentially the third
ventricle, and the hypothalamus forms the walls of the third ventricle.
And obvisously extends from the ventricular surface into the depth of the
brain. and this ventral part of the
diencephalon. So this triangle is really formed by
three structures that I think you can see quite plainly here in this image.
So one structure is found right here. And this is a white matter structure that
crosses the midline. Now, it's not the corpus callosum, the
corpus callosum is up here. It is another commissure.
So perhaps you can think of what that structure is.
I'll give you just a moment and everyone shout out together.
It's the anterior commisure, right here. So that anterior commisure is abit of a
visual landmark that defines one point of this triangle that can help bound your
recognition of the hypothalamus. Okay so the low point of the triangle is
right here. And again, does anyone know what this is?
this is a structure associated with the visual pathway, connecting the retina to
the diencephalon, and the pretectal region of the upper part of the brain
stem. This is actually the optic chiasm, okay?
So hopefully you can recognize that. So those are two points of the triangle.
The third point is actually a part of the hypothalamus itself.
And that is this medial ball like structure that sits very close to the
mid-line. There's a pair of them, one on either
side. And again who knows what this is?
This is one of the two mamillary bodies. Okay, so these are the three visual
landmarks that form this triangular region that allows us to recognize the
location of the hypothalamus. Well this is the gross view of the
hypothalamus. A more detailed anatomous view of the
hypothalamus would really be quite different.
So, if we were to look now at this triangular region in some detail, I, here
again is our triangle, connecting our anterior commissure, our optic chiasm,
and our mammillary body. What we find is that the hypothalamus is
not just one, uniform structure, but it really is a region that consists of many
different nuclear divisions. In this respect, the hypothalamus is
quite like the thalamus. Where in the thalamus as hopefully you
are now quite comfortable with this idea, there are a number of discrete Nuclei,
discreet clusters of cells, that have distinct input and output connections.
And the information that's conveyed via those inputs and outputs, helps to
define, the functional distinctions of each of those divisions.
Well the very same concept applies to the hypothalamus.
So what we find in this figure, is a rendering of just a subset of the nuclear
divisions of the hypothalamus that might be recognized.
So the color code just organizes these nuclei in a rostral to caudal, or an
anterior to posterior, progression. But there's also a medial to lateral
progression of nuclei that I want to highlight for you in just a moment.
Well, the big picture here is that the hypothalamus is comprised of a number of
discrete nuclei that maintain distinct patterns of input and output connections.
And many of these nuclei are associated with very particular functions.
And I'd like to highlight a few of them for you in just a little bit.
But, before we get there, what I'd like to be able to do is to give you a bit of
a broader picture of what the hypothalamus and it's many nuclei are
involved in. I'd like to give you a sense of the
general mechanism of hypothalamic function in each of these circuits.
And then we'll talk through some particular examples, that will give you a
sense of. What kinds of functions might be
associated with hypothalamic nuclei? Okay, well thinking very broadly, I would
assert that the hypothalamus regulates five basic functions.
It regulates blood pressure and electrolyte balance.
And it does so by modifying a variety of behaviors and physiological functions
that can impact blood pressure and electrolyte balance, such as, seeking out
fluids. Drinking generating an appetite for
salts. Adjusting the osmolarity of our blood.
And adjusting our vasomotor tone, which, as you know, has an impact on our blood
pressure. The hypothalamus can regulate body
temperature, and it can do so, again, through various physiological and
behavioral means. the hypothalamus has governance over
thermogenesis in the physiological systems of our body.
The hypothalamus can also motivate behaviors that result in seeking, warmer
clothing or warmer environments, or the removal of clothing and the seeking of
cooler environments. The hypothalamus can regulate energy
metabolism by coordinating our feeding behavior.
This is a huge topic. I wish we had more time in medical
neuroscience to really impact the role of the hypothalamus in the feeding system.
but perhaps in future editions of the course we'll try to create some
additional time for that. Well, the hypothalamus helps to regulate
the intake of food and its digestion. And it also helps to establish a sense of
satiety when our intake of food should cease.
And as you might imagine, there are a variety of systems, that can become
disregulated, and can result perhaps in a variety of eating disorders.
including obesity which is a huge problem in many parts of the world and including
here the United States. So we definitely need to direct
additional attention in understanding the governance of our feeding system and the
various disfunction or dis regulations of this part of the brain.
Well the hypothalamus is also involved in adjusting metabolic rate.
Which also obviously has a major impact on energy metabolism in the body.
The hypothalamus has really a fascinating role to play in governing reproduction.
And this involves a variety of different aspects of reproductive activity.
It involves the physical behaviors that are associated with sex and mating
activities. It involves a sense of sexual identity
and sexual orientation can be influenced by hypothalamic circuits.
There are hypothalamic circuits that operate in females to coordinate the
various physiological changes that are necessary to support pregnancy.
And then in the postpartum period, lactation and the neurishment of the
infant. And then lastly.
the hypothalamus is very important for coordinating the responses that support
what we call allostasis. That is changing the internal environment
to the body in order to respond to emergency conditions.
So, the hypothalamus is involved in coordinating the distribution of blood
flow. To where it's needed most given the
contingency that we're faced with. It is involved with coordinating the
release of hormones, governing the neuro endricine relation.
And, in this case of emergency response, is increasing the release of stress
hormones that help to mobilize the body for action.
And the hypothalamus even has interactions with our immune system that
likewise are important for mediating how we respond to emergency conditions.
Well this list could be longer than five items as I'm sure you can imagine.
And perhaps we could kick the, to a discussion forum.
a richer discussion of the various dimensions of hypothalamic coordination
of homeostasis and allostasis but I think I'll leave it here for now.
And now let's talk about the general mechanisms by which the hypothalamus can
control these five basic functions. Well I see the hypothalamus as sitting in
a key position in the nervous system anatomically and physiologically.
It's getting sensory inputs from visceral and somatic sensory pathways.
It is sensitive to chemosensory signals. in some parts of the hypothalamus
directly sensitive to the chemistry of the blood and the extracellular fluids.
in other parts receiving ascending sensory information from the nucleus of
the solitary tract and it's relays into the hypothalamus regarding the chemical
environment of the body. The hypothalamus is also sensitive to the
signaling derived from humoral factors that are circulating in the blood.
While all of this sensory information is integrated with contextual information
that's derived from the telencephalon. Largely the orbital and medial parts of
the prefrontal cortex. Other parts of the cerebral cortex
project to the hypothalamus as well, as does the amygdala and the hippocampal
formation in the medial parts of the temporal lobe.
So the hypothalamus is integrating context, it's integrating sensory
signals. And it's giving rise to output signals
that are coordinating our visceral motor, our somatic motor, and our neuroendocrine
systems. And the result is the production of
appropriate behavioral responses, that reflect the coordinated activity of all
these different dimensions of movement to produce behavior.
One important concept in hypothalamic control that we're still trying to
understand is this notion of biological set points.
So this integration of context and sensory signal is referenced to some
measure of homeostatic set point. Now we don't really understand this
concept that as it's played out in neuro biological terms for very many of the
systems that are coordinated in the hypothalamus.
But we suspect it's a common mechanism and the implementation of this mechanism
undoubtably gets us deep into moleculer biology of this circuitry.
And how molecular mechanisms are mediating these set points.
And how signaling within the neuron and perhaps even within the nucleus is
producing patterns of gene expression in space.
In particular, in circuits and in time in different conditions that demand
different sorts of responses. Well, we'll learn a little bit more about
this when we talk about the regulation of sleep and wakefulness.
there are circuits in the hypothalamus for which the molecular set points are
reasonably well understood. So I'm going to unpack a little bit of
that in a later session. But for now I'll just broadly emphasize
this general mechanism of hypothalamic function of integrating context and
sensory signals and referencing against a set point.
And, with deviation from that set point we have implementation of some kind of
behavioral change.