Okay, I think we're ready to put all this
together now and have a computational model that explains the action potential.
So, what we have here is a precise alignment of the voltage and
time-dependent changes in sodium and potassium conductance relative to the
action potential. I want you to spend a little bit of time
thinking about this figure, figure 3.8, and considering the alignment of these
conductance changes with what we see in membrane potential.
And the conclusion of such a thought process is that the action potential is
indeed explained by the voltage in time-dependent changes and permeability
of the neuronal membrane to potassium and to sodium.
Now, let's look first at the sodium conductance and how it's aligned to the
action potential. There is a sharp rise in sodium
conductance that occurs in time with the rise in membrane potential during what we
call the rising phase of the action potential.
In fact, the rising phase is explained by this rapid increase in sodium
conductance. Now, we haven't explained yet how that
itself got started. but we'll come to that in the next
tutorial. For now, I'll simply state, that some
external stimulus was applied to this experimental situation, or if we can
imagine, a real neuron or a real axon in a real brain, some stimulus in the form
of incoming electrical signaling activity potentially can depolarize that cell and
produce this explosive increase in sodium conductance.
That explains the rising phase of the action potential.
But, again, let's notice that the increase in sodium conductance is short
lived. Soon thereafter, there's this falling
phase which we call inactivation [SOUND] of the sodium conductance, and in terms
of the membrane potential, that can be recorded, this is called the falling
phase of the action potential. So, we have the rising phase on the up
slope and now the falling phase on the down slope.
Now, this sodium channel on activation, I know I'm getting ahead of myself just a
little bit with respect to the tutorial notes, but it does allow us to explain an
important phenomenon called the refractory period.
So, there's a period of time during which it's not possible to generate another
action potential and that's called the absolute refractory period.
That's happening during this time of sodium channel inactivation because in
order to generate another action potential, these sodium conductances need
to be reset back to 0. So, this inactivation has to be removed
in order for another action potential to fire.
So, the period of time during which these sodium channels are progressing through
their inactivation state is, in fact, the period of time that we call the absolute
refractory period. Alright, so let's now turn to the
potassium conductance. The potassium conductance is delayed
relative to the onset of the sodium conductance, but it's also sustained for
a longer period of time. And this sustained conductance for
potassium allows potassium to flow out of the cell, and that means positive charge
is leaving the inside of the cell. This delayed outward current or delayed
potassium efflux, contributes now to the falling phase of the action potential.
And notice, that at the conclusion of the falling phase of the action potential,
the membrane potential actually undershoots the resting membrane level by
just a small degree. So, this is called the undershoot, and is
explained by the ongoing influx of potassium ions.
Now, when we first considered the ionic basis of the action potential in
principle, it was sufficient to say that the resting membrane potential is
approximated by the Nernst equilibrium potential for potassium.
Now we can state that that's not exactly the case.
The Nernst equilibrium potential for potassium is actually much closer to the
[UNKNOWN] of this undershoot. The actual resting membrane potential,
I'll call it V rest. In this case, is about minus 65
millivolts, not quite where the Nernst equilibrium potential for potassium would
be, because there are other complications, other ionic fluxes that we
haven't taken the time to consider and, and that's okay.
we can simply state that the resting membrane is not an ideal membrane
permeable only to potassium. If it were, then V rest would be
precisely Ek, but there is a small offset, and that allows us to explain
this undershoot. Now, we've been emphasizing the
time-dependencies of these conductances. I don't want to overlook their voltage
dependencies. So, as the action potential is in its
following phase and undershoot phase, this membrane is now becoming
hyper-polarized relative to rest. And as it does so, the potassium
conductance trails back down towards its starting point.
So, as the membrane is hyper-polarizing and returning towards rest and
undershooting rests, the potassium conductance is shutting down.
Okay, will these considerations allow us to consider just a couple of other
aspects? the action potential behavior that are
worth noting. We've talked some about this concept of
threshold. now, I think we can approach this in a
bit more of a formal way. We know that there is something like a
threshold. We saw that a couple tutorials ago where
when exceeded, there is a runaway positive feedback cycle where membrane
depolarization leads to increased sodium permeability.
So, sodium rushes into the cell, and that leads to even further depolarization.
This is the rising phase of the action potential.
Well, that's accomplished when we stimulate the axon, or when the axon and
the neuron receive the stimulation from some other source, such that the
threshold for generating this positive feedback cycle is exceeded.
So, we might call that a super threshold depolarization.
Now, we can also move the cell in the depolarizing direction away from rest and
not hit threshold for [UNKNOWN] action potential.
That would be what we might call the subthreshold depolarization.
So, what's the difference? What's the difference between a
depolarization that achieves threshold and one that doesn't?
Well the difference is whether that depolarization crosses threshold, and
threshold therefore can be defined as the membrane potential when the sodium
current is exactly equal to the potassium current.
That is, it's a tipping point where just as much potassium is able to leave the
cell as sodium entering the cell. Now, because the sodium conductance opens
so much more quickly than the potassium conductance depolarizations of the
sufficient magnitude are certain to trigger an action potential.
Because we know that it's possible for so much more sodium to enter the cell than
potassium leaving the cell that were driving this cycle past threshold and
generating the rising phase of the action potential.
Another way to conceptualize this is to consider the regenerative nature of the
action potential. We've been talking about this fast
positive cycle where sodium is entering the cell leading to further
depolarization and the opening to even more sodium permeability channels that
increased sodium current can further depolarize the member until the point at
which that conductance begins to inactivate.
So, this is a picture of exceeding threshold, and running this fast positive
cycle. But we also have a slower negative cycle.
And this is set into motion as the membrane begins to depolarize and the
permeability channels for potassium begin to open up more slowly.
But as they do, potassium channels are opening, potassium is leaving the cell
and this leads to more of a negative feedback promoting the repolarization and
eventually, the undershoot of the membrane potential.
Now, it's interesting, it is not, that the negative cycle is slow and the
positive cycle is fast. this, this temporal dependency ensures
that the action potential can be an explosive event.
That is, the rising phase can happen unimpeded by this more slow negative
phase. However, the negative phase eventually
does dominate. Yes, the sodium conductance is beginning
to inactivate, but the potassium conductance will drive the membrane back
to resting levels and even below rest and to undershoot.
So, the slow negative cycle seems to be nature's way of ensuring a rapid
signaling event, that is an action potential of a short duration.
Now, there are action potentials in nature that can be longer because other
ion channels are involve but are canonical action potential that we find
in axons and in neurons is of this sort. A sharp rising phase followed by a sharp
falling phase with an undershoot. Now, this slow negative cycle also allows
us to explain the rest of the refractory period.
I mentioned that the absolute refractory period is when sodium conductances are in
their inactive state, and it's not possible to trigger a second action
potential until that inactivation state is removed.
However, there is a relative refractory period that will be present as long as we
continue to have this slow negative cycle turning away, which is to say the
membrane potential is an undershoot. Now, during that time, it is possible to
trigger a second action potential, because the sodium permeability channels
are ready to fire again. However with undershoot, there is
therefore a need for a slightly stronger stimulus that can overcome that
undershoot and bring the membrane potential to threshold in order to fire
an action potential. That's why this refractory period is said
to be relative. Well, together then, this fast positive
cycle, this slow negative cycle allows us to understand the shape and the duration
of the action potential, and it also raises some interesting philosophical
points, I think. It suggests that there is a limit to the
speed of processing in the nervous system and that limit is defined by the width of
the action potential. Of course, that limit is actually an
aggregate of the billions of action potentials that are happening all the
time in neural circuits and neural systems.
But in principal, there is a limit to what can be defined as the moment.
In fact, the aggregate consequence of this action potential width is that our
brain is perpetually living in the past. We are processing right now information
that just happened a few tens or perhaps even hundredths of milliseconds ago.
No, I'm not talking about memory, I'm talking about the brain working on the
incoming flow of information. And because of the width of the action
potential and, as we'll see in a few sessions, the delay that comes with
synaptic transmission, it takes some time to elaborates our thoughts and our
perceptions and our emotions. So, from that standpoint, we would seem
to be at something of a disadvantage, living in a world in real time knowing
that our brain is living perhaps a few hundreds of milliseconds in the past.
But brains are wonderful organs. One of the best things they can do is
predict the future. In fact, our brains are constantly
updating our model about the future, so that we can anticipate that actions that
happen in real-time in the world. So, even though the width of the action
potential imposes a bit of the delay, in our neural processing, we make up for
that delay by being able to predict behavior in the future.
Well, enough of that philosophy for the moment.
I think we're ready to wrap this up and I'll leave you with a study question
which you can find at the bottom of your tutorial and you can find it online in
our next slide. So, consider this regenerative nature of
the action potential, this fast positive cycle and the slower negative cycle.
And I want you to think about why is the action potential a spike, that sometimes
the term that neurophysiologists use to describe the action potential.
Which of these factors listed below do you think is the best explanation for the
short duration of a typical neuronal action potential?
Okay, I'll see you with the next tutorial.