Well, just to look at the big picture now
of inductive signalling, and this is a slide from the book that gives you way
more detail than I care for you to know in this course, but it does represent a
paradigm that I want you to appreciate. And that paradigm is what we might call a
transcriptional code. Which reflects the coordinated expression
of inductive signals that are coordinated both in location, but also in
developmental time. And this interaction of inductive
signalling is what gives rise to regional identity within the developing nervous
system. It helps to differentiate one location in
the brain stem or spinal cord from another.
It also establishes the dorsal ventral access of the developing neural tube,
which is critical for the development of sensory neurons.
As well as columns of cells that give rise to our motor output from the brain
stem and the spinal cord. So, these inductive signals really
provide for the establishment of the identity of distinct populations of
neurons that are necessary for the expression of mature function in the
human brain and spinal cord. Now, a similar transcriptional code is
responsible for the formation of regions that go on to form our forebrain, our
telencephalon and our .diencephalon. We know quite a bit less about how this
works in the forebrain than in the hindbrain and the spinal cord, but we're
beginning to understand some of the inductive signals that are responsible
for forming the cerebral cortex, the basal ganglia, other deep forebrain
structures, as well as the derivatives of the diencephalon, including the optic cup
and the otic placode, which goes on to form the structures that are necessary
for vestibular function and then, auditory function.
Well, once regional identity has been established along the length of the
developing neural tube, the next major challenge is proliferation.
Making the cells that are necessary to properly populate the grey matter
structures of the developing brain and spinal cord.
And proliferation is just mind-boggling in the developing nervous system.
We know that in the adult brain there are about 100 billion neurons and if that
number doesn't stagger the mind, consider that there are at least that many, and
probably several fold greater than that number, glial cells in the human central
nervous system. So just an incredible number of cells are
present in the brain and the spinal cord. And in order to produce so many cells,
the rate of proliferation is just staggering.
During the peak of the production of cells in the developing nervous system,
scientists have estimated that perhaps as many as 250,000 cells are produced every
minute in the developing embryo. Another amazing aspect of the
proliferation of brain cells, in early development, is that the production of
neurons is restricted in time to a very narrow period.
Nearly all the neurons that we have in our central nervous system right now were
born in the second trimester of pregnancy.
Now there are some brain structures, like the cerebellum, that has just the
enormous number of cells, and I'm referring to the granule cell population
of the cerebellum. And it takes a considerable longer period
of time to populate this cerebellum, so at least a year, perhaps as long as two
years, but with the exception of the cerebellum, virtually all of the cells
that we have in our brain and spinal cord were born in that second trimester of
pregnancy. Now some of you may know that there is
adult neurogenesis, that is, even right now there are new neurons being born,
but, as we'll come to in a few tutorials, the genesis of those new neurons is
restricted to the hippocampus, at least in our brain and it is perhaps very
important that this phenomenon occurs, it may contribute to learning and memory and
other aspects of maintaining our mental and physical health, but it is a
restricted population of cells that grow into that one region of the brain.
And, as far as we know now, the impact of the stem cells that may reside in the
human brain, seems to be limited. Both in terms of, normal physiological
function and the response of the brain to injury.
So, I think there are fairly profound implications for this restriction of
neurogenesis in the formation of the nervous system.
The neurons that we have right now, are the ones that were born in that second
trimester of pregnancy. So I would encourage you to think about
that. And wonder, well, what are the
implications for learning and memory? What are the implications for
rehabilitation following injury, if that's, if that's the case.
Maybe that's something that we can kick over to the discussion board.
And, see if that might inspire some interesting dialogue.
Well, let's talk a little bit about how this proliferation of brain cells occurs,
and then we can go on to talk about how brain cells are differentiated into
neuronal or glial fates. Brain cells, like most other cells in the
body, go through the usual stages of growth.
And the synthesis of new DNA, setting the stage for the division of the cell into
daughter cells, and that division occurs via a process that we call mitosis.
I certainly am assuming that you are broadly familiar with cell division from
your prior studies of cell and molecular biology so I won't go into the details of
how mitosis occurs. Rather I'd like to talk about how mitosis
happens in the walls of the neural tube that allows for the production of the
cells that come to populate specific gray matter structures that we recognize in
the human brain such as the cerebral cortex or the basal ganglia.
Well, proliferation occurs among a population of precursor cells in the
walls of the neural tube. These precursor cells have a recognizable
cell body containing the nucleus, and all the other organelles that are common to
the cells of our body. And that cell body, then, grows a process
that makes contact with the inner and the outer surface of this wall of the
developing neural tube. The outer surface will, will become the
piall surface surface of the brain, and the inner surface is, of course, the
inner surface of the neural tube, that goes on to differentiate into the
ependymal lining of the ventricles in the human brain.
Now, along this path between the pial surface and the ventricle surface this
cell body becomes multal. That is, it migrates in the up and down
directions, towards the pia, and then back towards the lumen of the ventricle.
So, as this cell body begins to translocate up towards the pial surface,
the cell now enters the synthesis stage, where DNA is being replicated.
And then, as DNA is replicated, the cell body then migrates back down towards the
luminal surface of this developing neural tube as the cell gets ready for division.
And it's near the ventricular surface then of this neural tube that mitosis
occurs. And mitosis can happen in a symmetrical
way. It can produce two precursor cells that
can go through this, this dance of migrating to the pial surface and back to
the luminal surface again, and undergo subsequent cycles of mitosis producing
more daughter cells, or there can be what's called asymmetrical division.
An asymmetrical division produces two different kinds of cells.
One cell remains a progenitor cell, which can go on to subsequent stages of
mitosis. Although it's mitotic potential now is
somewhat limited. The other daughter cell becomes what we
call a neuroblast and this is now a post-mitotic cell that can go on to
differentiate into neurons or glial cells.
Now once this neuroblast has been produced through this process of
asymmetrical mitosis, for many of these cells, they migrate away from the
ventricular region of the wall of the neural tube to a more peripheral
destination. And that migration is important for
forming a structure like the cerebral cortex.
So now we're looking a little bit further along in development.
And now the wall of the neural tube is beginning to become a bit more complex.
And if we look at this wall of neural tube in some detail, we can recognize the
ventricular zone, where mitosis is happening, but increasingly, we begin to
develop a separation between the pial surface and the luminal surface and the
wall of the neural tube. And we begin to populate a structure that
now acquires the properties of gray matter.
And this structure, we call the cortical plate.
The cortical plate is the first formation of the cerebral cortex.
So, the challenge here is to get these neuroblasts that are formed here in the
ventricular surface up to the cortical plate.
And this requires a process of migration. So, the cells must become motile, and
they must find their way to this outward cortical plate.
And the way this happens is these neuroblasts will migrate along a radial
fiber that is formed by a presumptive glial cell, we call this the radial glial
cell. So these are essentially precursor cells
now that continue to maintain their contact between the pial surface and the
luminal surface of the developing neural tube and this long extended process
becomes a pathway for the migration of the neuroblast.
So, over here to the right, we have a dipiction of one of these neuroblast
migrating along this radial glial fiber and these cells will translocate, they
will shimmy along this fiber on their way towards the cortical plate.
So there are a variety of factors that guide this migration.
And, along the way, these neuroblasts begin to further differentiate and
acquire a specific identity that will allow them to be differentiated into a
neuron or a glia or a particular sub type of one of those broad categories of brain
cells. So, as these neuroblasts migrate from the
ventricular zone up to the cortical plate, they do so in a particular
pattern. the cortex is essentially built in an
inside out fashion and here are some data from what's called birth dating studies
that have been done to track the final mitosis of a precursor cell and its
ultimate position within the developing cortical plate.
Well, there's a technical means by which this can be done.
It's described in a box in chapter 22, if you're interested in how this happens.
But essentially, what we can do is, we can label precursor cells at a particular
point in development, and simply ask what has become of the post mitotic
neuroblasts that were derived from that population of precursor cells that were
marked at a particular time of development.
And what this approach has taught us is that the cortex does indeed develop in an
inside out fashion. The cells that are born in, let's say,
the late first trimester of pregnancy come to populate the inner and the outer
margins of the cortical plate. And thereafter, as we progress through
the second trimester of pregnancy, the cells that are born early in that second
trimester come to reside in the lower portion of the cortical plate, in the
region that ultimately differentiates into cortical layer six, the inner layer
of the cortex that sits just on top of the white matter.
And as neurogenesis progresses through that second trimester of pregnancy,
extending at least in some cortical regions into the third trimester, we see
this progressive population of the cortical plate from the inner layers to
the outer layers such that the last cells to take up their residence in the
developing cortical plate are those that reside in what would become cortical
layers two and three. So these neurons that come to reside in
the outer part of the cortex have to migrate through these cells that have
already established residence in the deeper layers of the cortex.
And as these cells migrate through these deeper layers of the cortex, there is yet
additional opportunity for inductive signalling to influence the fate of these
later born and more superficial residing cells in the developing cortex.
So this is the pattern by which a cortex is constructed.
An inside out pattern involving the precise regulation of neurogenesis and
the migration of neuroblast. So, obviously there's a lot of
specification that's going on here. Cells are born at a particular time.
They are provided the signals that are essential for migration and for getting
off that radial glial fiber at the appropriate location such that the cortex
is progressively built out in this inside out pattern.
Now unfortunately, we know that some of the signals that are responsible are
subject to genetic mutation. Perhaps they can be influenced by
environmental toxins or dietary factors. And there are some known phenotypes where
this inside-out pattern is destructive. In fact, the process of neuronal
migration and the proper establishment of this inside-out pattern seems to be
essential for establishing the identity of the cells that take up residence in
these various layers of the cortex. And their location, as you may recall,
has much to do with determining the connections of the neurons that are
ending up in one cortical layer or another.
So if this process of migration and patterning of the cortex is disrupted,
it's very likely that also the connections of those cells will likewise
be disrupted. And we now know that there are a number
of congenital malformations of the cerebral cortex that reflect errors in
the migration of these neuroblasts. We think that perhaps even subtle errors
in the migration of these neurons might be responsible for some forms of mental
retardation and learning disability. Although there's much more work that
needs to be done to truly understand what's going on at the level, at the
level of cortical development that can be related to the broad spectrum of learning
disabilities that we confront in society. We'll say more about that topic as the
story of cortical maturation continues in subsequent tutorials.