Hello everyone, welcome back to Medical
Neuroscience. And welcome to this brief review of the
surface anatomy of the brain stem. this is an attempt breakdown some of the
complexity of the human brain. And so my goal is to help you appreciate
that complexity, but also give you a framework for coming to grips with it.
So there's actually nothing new in this tutorial.
Rather I want to put before you again the surface of the brain stem because we will
be diving shortly into the complexity of the cranial nerves.
And the nuclei and the brain stems into which they connect.
And I think in order to really get the most out of the tutorials that you are
about to view on these subjects. It will be really important for you to be
able to describe the surface features of the midbrain.
The pons and the medulla oblongata. So what i want to do is to show you again
the surface of the human brain stem. here's, a model of the brain stem with
parts of the deep fore brain nuclei attached on the top.
And I want you to be able to review the surface features of the mid brain, the
pons and the medulla. As seen from the ventral view, as well as
from the dorsal view as best we can. So what I'm going to do is give you
another look at the actual human brain stem.
And give you a chance just to refresh in your mind what are the principle features
that define each of these subdivisions. Such as the cerebral peduncles of the
mid-brain or the madgulara pyramids of the medulla oblongata.
So, I hope you enjoy this review and I hope it sets the stage for a productive
viewing of the remaining tutorial. That pertain to the way the cranial
nerves connect with this complex part of the human brain.
So, I'll see you next in the lab. For this lab lesson we want to explore
the ventral surface of the human brain. So I'm going to take this specimen and
hold it up so that you can have a clear view of the ventral surface of the brain.
Now if I tilt the specimen a little bit more you can appreciate our dark space.
Just behind these mammillary bodies. And this is roughly the junction of the
diencephalon and the midbrain. In fact, the space is defined by these
two broad columns, called the cerebral peduncles, or cerebral stalks.
One on either side of the space. Those stalks are a component of the
midbrain, or the mesencephalon. And as the tern peduncle or stock implies
this is a massive bundle of white matter. That allows the forebrain to connect with
everything below it, the hind brain and the spinal cord.
Now just inferior to the cerebral peduncles as we see them here in the mid
brain is the pons. And the cerebellum, the pons extends out
laterally again another massive bundle of white matter connecting the brain stem to
the cerebellum. And just inferior to the pons we have the
medulla oblongata or the medulla for short.
And on the ventral view of the medulla two striking features appear along the
mid line. It's a pair of structures called the
medulla pyramids that run on other side of the mid line.
This is a very important fiber pathway that runs through the brainstem.
It's called the cortical spinal tract, and there's one on each side of the
midline. These tracts contain the fibers of the
motor cortex that are sending their axons down into the spinal cord to govern
voluntary movement. One additional feature of the medulla
rhat sits just next to the medullary pyramid, is this bulging shape.
It looks like an olive that has been cut in half, and stuck to the side of the
medulla. Just lateral to the medullary pyramid.
And thankfully, that's what we call this structure.
This structure's called the olive. So it's easy to remember.
So we have the medullary pyramids right along the midline.
And then just lateral to the medullary pyramid is this bulging structure called
the olive.