In this third part of our tutorial on
lower motor neuronal control of movement, I'd like to talk about central pattern
generation. Our learning objective is simply to
describe central pattern generators and their significance for locomotion and
other forms of rhythmic behavior. Well lets talk about locomotion.
As one example of a basic pattern that is essential for movement that requires the
coordination of the activity of flexor muscles and extensors muscles in our
limbs. And even across the mid line of the
spinal cord. Now for a Quadrapedal animal like a cat.
This involves coordinating flexors and extensors in the hind limbs as well as
the forward limbs. In bipedal locomotion, which is what we
do. we see something quite similar.
There's coordination of flexor extensors in our weight bearing muscles.
in our lower extremities. But there's also coordination of swing
cycles with respect to what we're doing with our arms and our upper extremities.
So, coordination is happening across the midline.
It's happening, within the motor columns that are supplying flexor and extensor
muscles, right next to each other in the same ventral horn.
And there's also coordination that's happening across spinal cord segments.
So, how is this possible? Well, when we just consider the flexion
extension reflexes that are seen when we encounter a potentially harmful stimulus.
Like stepping on a tack, we saw how local circuits can coordinate the activities of
flexors and extensors and local circuits can even span the midline.
So, that what's going on on the opposite ventral horn can be synergistic with the,
behavioral goal. Well something like that is what we see
in the generation of rhythmical movement. Rhythmical pattern.
And this has been studied for locomotion in mammals, but it's been really worked
out quite well in invertebrate systems. And in very primitive kinds of vertebrate
animals. one such model system that has been very
productive in the study of central pattern generation.
Has been the study of swimming behavior in a very primitive kind of vertebrate
called the lamprey. Well, the lamprey is a swimming creature
that swims through the coordination of a set of segmental muscles.
And we now know that the output to those muscles is derived of course from alpha
motor neurons that send their axons out through ventral roots.
But the output of these alpha motor neurons is coordinated through a set of
inter-neurons some of which are[UNKNOWN]. Some of which inhibitory and some of
which are responsible for generating the essential rhythms that define the
swimming behavior. Now studies of these fairly simple
central pattern generators that we see in animals like the lamprey or in other
kinds of simple model systems that general rhythmical behaviors.
What we find is that central pattern generators tend to have the same kinds of
elements. No matter what the model system is that
we happen to be looking at. Of course, there are variations on these
themes, but we tend to recognize the same kinds of elements that are common to all
circuits that generate patterns. One common element is the presence of
pace maker neurons. Some of these neurons will generate the
rhythms that define the behavior. And these rhythms reflect the activities
in oscillations of membrane potential in bursts of actions potentials that are
generated by the set of pacemaker neurons.
Central pattern generators typically involve an interaction between excitatory
neurons. And inhibitory neurons.
Some of these neurons are going to send connections that cross the mid-line, and
this allows for the coordination of circuitry in one ventral horn with that
of another. There will also be circuitry that spans
the segmental levels, allowing for the interactions from one segment to another.
Another common element that we see in central pattern generation is modulation
from descending inputs. For vertebrates this comes in the form of
descending inputs from the brain stem and this allows the expression of pacemaker
activity to actually be initiated. By these descending inputs.
Often these inputs release biogenic amine neurotransmitters.
And these biogenic amines can often set the rhythm in motion or they can modulate
the rate of the rhythm. There's also input to these pacemaker
circuits that come. From sensory signals that are derived
from our sensory receptors and conveyed via the dorsal roots into the spinal cord
circuitry. but the sensory signals often are not
essential. So, it's possible to remove these sensory
signals and still see the expression of this essential rhythm generated by this
circuit. And one final feature that I'll mention
on central pattern generators is that they can actually generate different
kinds of movement patterns. Consider for example the difference
between a walk and a jog and a run and a sprint.
This is not simply just a matter of the rate of output.
But there is actually a different pattern that can be produced.
This is especially true in quadrupedal animals where there's a transition from
an alternation of Activities in the limbs between fore
limbs and hind limb to a coordination that is concurrent with the transition
from a trot to a gallop. So something like, that must occur in our
central pattern generators as well as we transition from one kind of base to
another. So the very same circuit can generate
more than one pattern. Although the activity of the central
pattern generators can be modulated via descending inputs.
The pattern itself can still be expressed even in the absence of these descending
inputs. And this point was made rather
dramatically some decades ago in experiments done on cats that were
subject to transsection of the spinal cord.
So in the experiments illustrated here what was discovered is that with a
thorasic trans-section of the spinal cord.
it was still possible to suspend this cat on a treadmill and record the rhythmical
activities of extensors and flexor muscles that were consistent with
locomotion. As the hind limbs transitioned between
the stance phase where pressure is applied to the treadmill and the swing
phase. As the limb is removed from the treadmill
and then swung forward for the next cycle of step.
This basic rhythm of stance and swing with the activation of flexor muscles and
extensor muscles was seen even after the dorsal roots were sectioned.
Suggesting that this is a pattern that is intrinsic to the circuitry of the ventral
horn of the spinal cord. Even though typically it's informed by
sensory signals coming in through the dorsal roots.
And it's modulated. And initiated via descending inputs from
the brain stem. Now as you might imagine there's been
considerable interest in whether this kind of treadmill training
For human beings who've suffered either a spinal cord injury or brain injury can be
Clinically significant for walking recovery.
well there is ongoing effort to try to study this question.
So the upshot seems to be that at least for walking behavior in people.
That our spinal cord seem to be more dependent upon the descending controls
for coordinating and fascilitating the activation of our central pattern
generators. Than in some of the other animal models
that have been explored. Well, we come now to the last part of
this tutorial where we consider the clinical picture of individuals who have
suffered damage to their lower motor neurons.
So, I'll see you in just a moment, and we'll consider the lower motor neuron
syndrome.