Okay.
Here we are in our Brainstem Atlas within Sylvius.
So, I just want to navigate over to the vestibular nuclei.
So, we're going to find them in the caudal part of the pons, in the upper
part of the medulla. And we'll find them in the dorsal and
lateral aspect of the tegmentum of the brainstem, okay?
So we're about the level of the mid pons here.
If we go down just a few millimeters and look in this dorsolateral tegmentum, now,
we see some nuclei that are part of our vestibular nuclear complex, okay?
We are just above the junction of the pons and medulla here, so we would expect
to be near the upper part of this complex.
If we go down closer to that junction, now, this looks more like the upper
medulla, which indeed it is. we see a medial vestibular nucleus, a
spinal vestibular nucleus don't be concerned about the names of the
individual nuclei. But I just want you to understand where
these nuclei are found in the tegmentum of the upper medulla and the caudal pons.
Here is a little bit of the nerve root of the eighth nerve here, and our cochlear
nuclei would be out here just on the lateral aspect of our inferior cerebellar
peduncle, so just on the medial side of that peduncle is where we find our
vestibular nuclei. So I want you to appreciate sort of the
regional location of where we find these nuclei dorsal and lateral tegmentum of
the upper medulla and the caudal pons, right next to the inferior cerebellar
peduncle and just dorsal to our spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus.
Okay? Now, this is important because, we may
discover in our clinical studies a patient that has had a stroke that
effects this dorsal lateral region of the upper part of the medulla.
This can happen with an infarction of our posterior inferior cerebellar artery, for
example. If that should be the case, we would
expect there to be this collection of neurological signs and symptoms that we
can relate to this region of the brain stem.
We would expect to see a problem with our trigeminal system, our spinal cerebellar
systems, and now, we would expect to include problems with our vestibular
system. So if we had damage to, let's call this
the left side, the left vestibular nuclear complex.
We might expect there to be vestibular nystagmus that would be consistent with
turning of the head to the right. That nystagmus would be a slow phase of
movement to the left and then a quick beat back to the right.
So, if we saw that vestibular nystagmux , together with a lack of sensitivity to
painful stimuli on the left side of the face, and perhaps some incoordination of
the left side of the body, then we might conclude that, indeed, we've got this
kind of a lesion of the left dorsolateral tegmentum of the upper medulla.
So this is why regional anatomy is critical for interpreting clinical case
studies, and the way we get there is building our knowledge one system at a
time. And so for today's lesson, I want you to
appreciate the fact that these vestibular nuclei are located right here, the
dorsolateral tegmentum of the upper medulla called a pons.
So, I hope you enjoyed this brief tour of the vestibular system, both peripheral
mechanisms, and now, central processing. And I hope you have time to put your
vestibular system in action. I know I need to, I'm due on my
basketball court in my driveway to have a little basketball game with my son, and
that is sure to activate all of my vestibular apparatus, I'm sure.
So, let me go do that and I'll see you next time.