Okay, well, let's now look in a little
bit more particular detail at different nuclei of the hypothalamus, and I want to
give you a sense of what is the diversity of function that is attributable to
different nuclei in this collection. that we call the hypothalamus.
Now, I don't intend for you to know all of this detail, I really don't.
I give some of this to you in the tutorial notes, mainly as a way for you
to just spend a few minutes thinking together with me, about the hypothalamus
and the diversity of systems that it impacts.
there is one however that I want to highlight for you, because we're going to
come back to this in a later session. Okay, I mentioned one can look at the
hypothalamus in different axes, from front to back, from anterior to
posterior, from medial to lateral. What I want to do is just highlight a few
nuclei that catch my attention at least, going from the medial to lateral axis of
the hypothalamus. And let's begin right along the walls of
the third ventricle. There's a very interesting pair of nuclei
that we find right along the wall of the third ventricle and just inferior to it.
these nuclei are found in what we might call the Periventricular zone, right
around the ventricle. There is a nucleus called the periventricular nucleus and there is another one called the arcuate nucleus and these
nuclei are intimately related to the production of hormones in the anterior
part of the pituitary gland. This is the part that we call the adenohypophysis. So the anterior pituitary receives
hormones that are produced by cells that sit in this periventricular region of the
medial hypothalamus. And those hormones enter the portal
circulation where they are then Transported via this blood supply to the
anterior part of the pituitary. These hormones, we call them releasing
factors, then have an impact on the neuro secretory cells of the anterior
pituitary, and these cells then produce a hormone that enters the general
circulation. And can impact physiology throughout the
entire body, so right along the medial border of the hypothalamus is where we
find those neurons that govern the output of the anterior part of the pituitary.
Well, moving on just a bit more lateral in the color code here these would be
these darker so, solid shaded regions in here.
we have a variety of interesting nuclei that do all kinds of different functions.
Let me just highlight a few of them. There is a set of nuclei called the
paraventricular nucleus and the supraoptic nucleus.
So here's the supraoptic nucleus, it's called supraoptic because it sits just
above the optic chiasm. And in a slightly more dorsal position is
this paraventricular nucleus. these nuclei are, are two of many that we
find in this more medial zone of the hypothalamus.
I mentioned the paraventricular supraoptic nuclei because these are the
nuclei that have the neurons that grow their axons through the infundibulum,
that is, the stalk of the pituitary, and release hormones directly into the
general circulation in the neurohypophysis or the posterior part of
the pituitary gland. Okay?
So the periventricular zone is where we find our neurons that are engaging the
anterior part of the pituitary. And then in this more medial zone, that's
where we find the super optic and paraventricular nucleus that are
releasing hormones into the posterior pituitary.
Well there are other neurons in this para-ventricular nucleus in particular,
that are not releasing hormones in the pituitary rather they are growing axons
and descend into the brain stem, and even into the spinal cord.
And these para-ventricular neurons that grow these long axons are involved in
coordinating the output of pre-ganglionic neurons in the parasympathetic and in the
sympathetic divisions of our visceral motor outflow.
So the paraventricular nucleus is a very important structure in regulating various
dimensions of our behavioral response. Okay, I'd like to highlight a few more
nuclei here in this medial zone. generally speaking, this medial and
lateral preoptic area here. And I'll, I'll guess I'll highlight the
medial preoptic region. this is a, a really fascinating part of
the interior hypothalamus. This is a part of the hypothalamus that
is involved in various aspects of coordinating reproduction.
And sexual behavior. So this is a part of the hypothalamus
that we think is especially involved in defining our sexuality, and motivating
sexual activities, and here there are circuits that are coordinating various
aspects of mating behavior, and in women various dimensions of pregnancy, and
postpartum behavior. So, this preoptic area has connections
with important parts of our limbic forebrain, that are involved with
emotion, as you might expect our emotions are important sources of input to
circuits that are mediating sexual behavior and sexual activities.
This medial pre-optic area is also involved in governing the release of
urine in the process of micturition. We'll have more to say about that in the
final part of this tutorial. But just keep that in mind.
The medial preoptic area is also involved in governing bladder function.
Other structures in this medial zone worth mentioning include the
suprachiasmatic nucleus. So this is a small nucleus that sits just
above the chiasm here, just a little bit. Medial and anterior to where I
highlighted the super optic nucleus. So this is the suprachiasmatic nucleus.
Hopefully, that's easy to remember. And I do want you to remember this
nucleus, because this is a nucleus we'll come back to when we talk about the
regulation of sleep. The suprachiasmatic nucleus is the master
clock of the human body. This is the place where we have neurons
that generate a circadian rhythm, that is, a rhythm that runs roughly 24 hours,
not precisely 24 hours, we'll mention that in a later tutorial, but it allows
us to establish a daily rhythm For behavior, for the release of hormones
that can affect our body's physiology and our behavior.
so very important part of the hypothalamus, and it's that part that I
mentioned when we discussed the visual pathways that receives input from the
special set of photosensitive ganglia cells in the retina.
So by this connection with the retina, this suprachiasmatic nucleus can be
entrained to our natural cycles of light and, and darkness, of daytime and
nighttime. There's another set of medial zone nuclei
that I would mention. the dorsal medial nucleus.
and also the ventral medial nucleus. These two nuclei seem to be involved in
some other dimensions of reproductive behavior.
And even parenting behavior. At least based on animal studies one
might expect that. these nuclei seem to contain circuits
that are involved in the feeding system. helping to motivate the consumption of
food. As well as mediating signals that are
related to satiety. so very important networks here for
motivating the ingestions of foods and possible also particular appetites for
things like salts. Or particular food substances that we
might happen to be in deficit of. There are other circuits here that are
also involved with water balance and thermo-regulation.
Well lastly I would highlight this more lateral part of the hypothalamus
indicated by this stippled region here. So there are nuclei out here more
laterally that are involved in really a variety of functions that pertain to
attention and arousal. Now these aren't the only neurons in the
brain that are important for those kinds of functions.
But these parts of the hypothalamus seem to have broad connections, especially
with the cerebral cortex. And they seem to be in a position to
modulate the way the cortex responds to other kinds of inputs.
So in that sense, the lateral hypothalamus seems to have role to play
in modulating levels of vigilance in the brain.
in a manner might be similar to signals that are motivated by the amygdala, as
well as some of the biogenic amine systems in the brain stem.
Well, as I said when we got into this slide there are way too many details that
are beyond the scope of this course to expect you to take in, in this brief
tutorial. rather what I want you to do is at least
remember this important suprachiasmatic nucleus, cause we're going to come back
to that. But even more so, I hope you get just an
impression that there are a variety of physiological functions that can be
absolutely central to motivated human behavior that are coordinated at the
level of the hypothalamus. Well, now that you've had a bit of a
sense of some of the functions associated with nuclei of the hypothalamus.
I want to conclude this session by talking about a particular clinical
condition called Horner syndrome. Now Horner syndrome is relatively common,
we might see it in a variety of patients for different reasons, and it is a
presentation of signs and symptoms that are typically associated with the face.
Now Horner's syndrome could be bilateral but it more commonly is unilateral and
its characterized by a set of signs that can be best appreciated clinically by
focusing on the region of the eyes. So what we find most significantly is
miosis, which is a constriction of the pupil.
Now what you're looking for when you examine the diameters of the pupils is
not so much an absolute size but an asymmetry.
In the case of Horner's Syndrome what we see is the effected iris has a smaller
pupil than the normal iris. Well it might be somewhat difficult to
appreciate what is normal, but I think you can see that the dimension of the
pupil is smaller in this patient's right eye compared to the left eye.
So this is miosis. It's evidence of an abnormal constriction
of the pupillary muscle. Well, in addition to the constriction of
the pupil, we also see a drooping of the eyelid associated with Horner's syndrome.
So this might be a subtle sign But, it's one that you should look for
nevertheless. And, one might also get the impression
that the eyeball itself, the globe, is somewhat sunken into the orbit.
There are some other signs and symptoms associated with Horner's syndrome that
may be a little more difficult to appreciate clinically.
But perhaps to suit patient interview you can
Confirm their presence or absence. one sign you may be able to detect if you
were to put your fingertips on the, on the cheeks of your patient.
You may discover that the side with the constricted pupil actually feels a little
bit warmer to the touch than the opposite side.
Now, if you were to ask the patient about their sweat response to hot environments
or to exercise you may discover that the side with the smaller pupil doesn't
actually seem to sweat as much as the opposite side of the face.
Well, can you think of what all of these signs might have in common?
Do you remember what's responsible for the dilation of the pupil?
What about the ability to keep our eyelids open throughout the day?
And what system supplies innervation to the sweat glands?
Or what do you think an increase in the temperature of the skin might tell you.
About the tone of the vasculature that's supplying these cutaneous structures of
the face. Well, hopefully, I'm leading you along
the path that allows you to understand that what all of these systems have in
common, is sympathetic control. Well, Horner's Syndrome can result from
an interruption in the pathway that links the hypothalamus up here in the ventral
and anterior part of the diencephalon with our ganglionic neurons.
Which, with respect to the governance of these structures in the face Are
localized to the superior part of that sympathetic trunk.
Specifically, the pupillary dilator muscle is supplied by ganglionic neurons
that sit in the superior cervical ganglion and grow an axon through the
carotid plexus to reach the orbit where there's innervation of this dilator
muscle of the iris. So, just given the broad distribution of
this system from hypothalamus to face or to iris, you could imagine that, one
could have a legion or some other kind of disease process that would affect this
pathway, either within the nervous system or outside of the nervous system, and
produce Horner's Syndrome. And indeed, one might have, damage to the
neck, that's outside of the nervous system that potentially could impact,
the, superior aspect of the sympathetic trunk and produce a Horner's syndrome.
Or one might have damage within the nervous system itself.
So for example, if there were a stroke in the lateral tegmentum of the brain stem.
Here is a representation of the medulla. we potentially could have a Horner
syndrome in conjunction with signs and symptoms that would help you localize the
lesion to this particular level. In addition, one might have an injury to
the cervical spinal cord, or perhaps even to the thoracic spinal cord, that might
impact the ability of the hypothalamus and the brain stem to interact with the
intermediolateral cell column, or one might have damage to that cell column
itself and produce Horner's syndrome. So, of course, one can have an injury to
the neck and have some kind of a, of a isolated Horner's syndrome, at least
isolated with respect to other neurological signs and symptoms.
But whenever we have the image within the CNS itself, we're likely to have a
Horner's syndrome together with other neurological signs and symptoms.
That, you'll piece together as a means of localizing the injury.
Well, I would suggest that we conclude this, segment of our tutorial, focusing
on the hypothalamus, with a couple of study questions.
So I'll invite you to think through those study questions, and then we'll, finish
up on the visceral motor system and indeed all of unit 4.
By using one physiological system as a way of demonstrating how visceral motor
control is integrated with sensory signals, and coordinated with somatic
motor control, to govern behavior. And the example I'm going to choose is
called micturition, or otherwise the voiding of our bladder, urination.
Well, I know I've had just a little bit just too much coffee this morning.
So, before I talk to about voiding the bladder.
Well, I think I need to do it myself. Let's take a short bathroom break and
when we come back Let's talk about how the nervous system governs maturation.