[BLANK_AUDIO]. Hi everyone.
Welcome to this tutorial on the Molecular Mechanisms of Action Potential
Generation. So in the previous two sessions we've
been talking about the ionic basis of action potential generation.
Now we want to move more towards the biological question of, what are the
mechanisms that are responsible for the production of this signature electrical
event, that we find in excitable tissue? All of this relates to one of our
Neuroscience Core Concepts, the one we've been focusing on.
the fact that Neurons communicate using both electrical and chemical signals.
So, we continue to talk about the electrical signaling activity of neurons
and very soon we'll be moving in to talk about the chemical signals.
Well, for today's session we have some learning objectives.
I want you to be able to describe the molecular properties of sodium and
potassium channels and understand and recognize how these properties explain
the voltage and time-dependent permeability changes that underlie the
generation of action potentials. And secondly, I want you to be able to
describe the molecular mechanisms that establish the chemical gradients for
these important ions, sodium and potassium across the neuronal plasma
membrane. Well, to begin, let's again reiterate
some of our foundational principles, that is, that charges in potassium and sodium
permeability underlie the action potential.
So we've seen this figure a few times before.
It allows us to conceptually understand the resting membrane potential as being a
state dominated by the leak conductance for Potassium.
the rising face being a phase of action potential generation where there's an
explosive increase in the permeability of the membrane for sodium.
Such that at the peak of the action potential, the membrane potential comes
very close the Nernst equilibrium potential for sodium.
Because the sodium permeability of the membrane is so much greater than any
other ionic permeability, the ability to predict membrane potential.
becomes as a first approximation the Nernst equilibrium equation for sodium.
Well, the falling phase of the action potential involves a dramatic reduction
sodium permeability, and this is the inactivation of the sodium conductance.
We'll talk about the molecular mechanisms for that inactivation in this tutorial.
But in addition, we know that the voltage and time dependency of the potassium
conductance means that the potassium permeability is rising at the same time
that sodium permeability is collapsing. And those two factors together allow us
to return to our resting condition where once again the permeability of the
membrane due to the fact that there's some leakiness of the membrane to
potassium is greater than sodium permeability.
And once again the resting membrane potential is established being close but
not precisely the Nernst equilibrium potential for potassium.
Well this conceptualization allows us to again to understand how changes in
membrane permeability lead to changes in membrane potential.
And as we discussed last time, and we'll talk about the mechanisms today, changes
in membrane potential can in turn have an impact on changes in membrane
permeability. Now I would encourage you to, view,
again, the animation that's available on the website that supports our textbook.
It's animation 2.3 on the action potential.
You can click following the hyperlink on your tutorial notes or just navigate on
your own to that website. Alright, well, for today what we really
want to understand is what are the molecular mechanisms that allow a change
in membrane potential to impact membrane permeability?
And this drives us to consider the actual integral membrane proteins themselves
that constitute ion channels for sodium and potassium.
We'll do so in two ways. First we'll consider a functional model
for how this feature, change in membrane. Potential leads to a change of membrane
permeability, and then we'll consider the actual molecular structure of these
proteins and gain some insight as to how this plays out in actual biological
terms. So first the functional model.
Now, this is an experiment that should be familiar to you now.
what we're doing is using our voltage clamp method to apply a step
depolarization that is going to be supratheshold, that is well above
threshold for the generation of action potentials.
And rather than showing you the action potential or the.
Voltage and time-dependant changes in conductance, I want to show you our
current understanding of what's happening at the level of the integral membrane
proteins that constitute permeability channels for sodium and potassium.
So let's step through this figure in time and let's look at what happens at the
onset of depolarization. So, that would be time 0., when we first
depolarize. Now, recall that the inward current is
fast, that is the increase in sodium conductance is quite rapid, relative to
the increase in potassium conductance, and now we gain some insight as to how
that might happen. almost instantaneously, with the
depolarization step the, probability of sodium channels reconfiguring from their
closed state to the open state is dramatically increased.
In other words, sodium channels open at the onset of depolarization.
Now notice what's going on for potassium channels.
The probability that a potassium channel will go from a close state to an open
state, is less than for the sodium channel with this step in depolarization.
If we consider the behavior of a single ion channel, which its possible now to do
we can understand this behavior in, more principle terms.
But on the aggregate what we can say is that the sodium channels respond as a
collection of proteins more rapidly. With greater probability of opening with
the onset of depolarization relative to the potassium channel.
This is why the positive feedback phenomenon is so rapid, and why the
repolarization phenomenon lags the explosive rising phase of the action
potential. Okay, so let's move a little bit further
out in time. Now we are a few milliseconds later.
And we see that the sodium conductance is beginning to inactivate.
Why? Not because the pore of the channel is
pinching down, but because there is a particular mechanism at play here on the
inner aspect. That is, the cytoplasmic surface of the
sodium channel. There is a gate that we call the
inactivation gate that swings shut as the membrane becomes depolarized.
So, we'll talk about what exactly that is and why that's happening in just a
minute. But for now I want you to note that
inactivation of the sodium channel is due to the fact that there is this particular
cytoplasmic feature of the channel protein.
That swings closed and plugs up the pore of the membrane from the cytoplasmic side
preventing any further influx of sodium channels.
And this is why that sodium conductance rises so rapidly and then falls equally
rapidly because of the development of inactivation.
Now at about this time our potassium channels are opening up more
consistently. That is the probability of channel
opening is greater, and more and more potassium channels are in fact in the
open configuration allowing for potassium, to flow out of the neuron.
This contributing to repolarization and eventually the undershoot of membrane
potential. Now notice the cytoplasmic surface of
this potassium channel. There is no inactivation gate, at least
on this particular type of potassium channel.
So these channels are going to continue to remain in their open configuration
provide that we continue to depolarize this membrane, in this case with the
voltage clamp experiment. It's only with the cessation of
depolarization, that is when we step back down near the resting membrane potential,
that we induce a change in both kinds of channels.
This hyperpolarization is essential to restore the closed state for both of
these channels. For the sodium channel, that means that
the pore itself Is closed, and the inactivation gate is open.
For the potassium channel it means that the pore simply has closed off preventing
any further efflux of potassium ions. Now let me again restate the point about
the sodium channel, because it is important.
Notice that there's a difference between inactivation and closed.
In the inactive state, the pore of the channel is open but the gate has closed
on the cytoplasmic surface of the channel.
In the closed state, the pore is stopped up preventing the further flow of ion.
However, the inactivation gate has been reset and restored.
So, when the channel for sodium is back to it's closed state, we are now outside
of the absolute refractory period. It's possible for this channel to open up
again. That is, it's possible for this channel
to reenter a cycle that will allow for channel opening and the influx of sodium.
So, the absolute refractory period of the action potential is defined in terms of
the molecular structure of the ion channel itself.
When these channels are inactive they are incapable of passing current.
That inactivation is only relieved with by polarization.
So this inactivated state is when we have our absolute refractory period.
Okay? Alright, well the relative refractory
period, that is a time following sufficient hyperpolarization to reset
that sodium inactivation gate. but it's a time when these potassium
channels may remain open, and we may still be in the under shoot of the action
potentials so it will require stronger stimulus to activate that sodium channel
sufficiently to induce that positive feedback circuit that leads to this
explosive, regenerative rising phase of the action potential.
Okay, now, let's move on from this functional consideration of how sodium
and potassium channels work relative to their voltage and time dependencies to
consider the actual molecules themselves. Well, these ion channels are very
complex. But they do have some features in common,
and I want to emphasize their common features, and just highlight some of the
differences. So let's begin by thinking about the
sodium channel. Well, the sodium channel that we've been
talking about is really a complicated, integral membrane protein that contains
multiple motifs, in which there are helical segments of the protein that are
passing through the membrane. So, we can recognize 4 motifs, with each
motif being comprised of 6 transmembrane segments.
and these, motifs, fold together in a three-dimensional shape within the
membrane. Constituting the voltage gated ion
channel that selectively permeable for sodium.
Now as this protein establishes its tertiary shape in the membrane it's
configured in such a way to establish a pore for the passage of sodium ions, and
the electrical... And physical structure of that, ion
channel pore account for its selectivity for sodium.
I'll also highlight these yellow transmembrane segments that we see in
each of these motifs. And these contain positively charged
amino acid residues that account for the voltage sensitivity of this protein.
Now there are also additional components to this channel.
There's something called a beta subunit that aggregates with the the main
integral membrane protein that, that forms this channel.
So this is the sodium channel. We think there are probably at least ten
sodium channel genes that express the proteins that are essential for building
these channels. But those genes can have multiple reading
frames. And the product of that gene can be
modified in various ways. So there may be different capacities to
modify this basic structure in interesting ways that will have an impact
on its function. And in some cases there may be genetic
mutations of these genes that will impair the function of these channels.
And that's a fascinating story that you could read more about in a box that's
found in chapter four. Okay, so that's a brief look at the
sodium channel. We actually know more currently about the
molecular structure of potassium channels.
One, perhaps surprising fact is that there are a large number of genes that
encode potassium channels and potassium channels can have multiple different
forms that have different physiological properties owing to their distinct
molecular structure. The ion channels that are constituted
from these gene products. Typically represent the aggregate of
multiple subunits that is not just one integral membrane protein but more
commonly four integral membrane proteins that come together and constitute the,
voltage gated potassium channel or potassium channel that's gated by some
other mechanism. there's a large family of these channel
genes and a large number variations on an ion channel that allows the passage of
potassium. So far we've been talking about the kind
of voltage dependent ion channel that's represented over here on the left hand
side of this illustration. this is a channel that is gated by a
change in voltage. So it, like the sodium channel, has a
voltage sensor, we'll talk more about that in just a moment.
But there are other kinds of ion channels that are sensitive to other factors, such
as Calcium within the cell. And that is attributable to a cytoplasmic
portion of this integral membrane protein that can interact with Calcium.
And there's a large variety of other potassium channels that we won't, mention
at this point. But together, they contribute to the
exquisite regulation of excitability. And the nature of electrical signals that
neurons can generate. Now let's back away just a little bit
from the more detailed look at the molecular structure of the voltage gated
ion channel. And consider again form a more functional
perspective how these various components aggregate together to form a functional
ion channel. So this is a, model now of a voltage
gated potassium channel so we imagine that.
These four subunits come together to constitute a channel.
And there's something that we'll call a pore loop that forms from the aggregate of
these four subunits. And these pore loops together establish
the ionic selectivity and the size selectivity for the passage of potassium
ions. Now we've already talked some about the
voltage sensor that's part of each subunit, and that voltage sensor is
illustrated by these wings out to the side of these subunits that carry
positive recharged amino acid residues. So in the hyperpolarized state when the
inside of the cell is made more negative, these positive charges in these wing-like
structures are drawn inward toward that negativity.
The conformational change that happens as the subunits pivot allows for a closure
of the pore loop regions, and potassium ions are not able to pass outward through
this channel with Hyperpolarization. Now imagine what will happen if we
depolarize the cell, that is we make the inside of the cell positive.
Perhaps by the opening of a voltage gated sodium channel.
Now these wings that bear these positive charges are pushed away by electrostatic
forces. That pivots the sub units in a way that
now opens up a pore in the center of this channel and potassium ions are then able
to aggregate and pass out of this pore region.
So the function of these ion channels is a reflection of their structure.
And the voltage dependency, and even the time dependency has to do with the
structure of these voltage sensors. And perhaps the density of charge
residues that might contribute to the, to the kinetics of channel opening.
Now, as I mentioned, one of the consequences of the genetic encoding from
these ion channels is that mutations can occur that have consequences for
neurological function and in some cases human health.
And you can read more about that topic, if you're interested, in box D in chapter
four of our textbook. So what we've been talking about so far
are the molecular structures that constitute ion channels, and this is a
way of discharging those gradients that are essential for generating electrical
signals. Now let's turn to the molecular
mechanisms that are responsible for establishing those gradients in the first
place. I mentioned when we first introduced this
topic, that those gradients are established by ion pumps, and ion
transporters. And here, we see a variety of pumps and
transporters. Probably the most important that I should
emphasize is right over here on the left hand side of figure 4.9.
It's the Sodium-Potassium ATPase. This is, arguably, the most important
molecule in the nervous system. It seems a little ridiculous to even make
such a claim, but if it were possible to identify one molecule of supreme
importance, this would be it. The Sodium-Potassium ATPase.
It consumes a significant portion of all the energy that is burnt up in the
function of the nervous system. And it's one of the principal reasons why
the brain requires such a constant, and highly regulated flow of blood to deliver
oxygen and glucose the principle substrate for oxidated metabolism in
brain tissue. There are other pumps besides the sodium
potassium ATPase as we see here. There are pumps for calcium, there are
iron exchangers that move sodium and calcium and protons.
There are co-transporters that can take advantage of a concentration gradient for
one ion to transport another. And we don't need to get into all of this
complexity at the present time. Rather, what I want to do is consider in
a little bit more detail, the function of our principle path to Sodium-Potassium
ATPase. Now the story of how this function works
is the result of lot of empirical research that had been done in various
ways, one can imagine based on our prior consideration of the action potential.
That one can study this pump by removing other sodium or potassium from the
solution and asking how these manipulations might affect pump activity.
one might also gain some insight by depriving that pump of its supply of
energy to find out what's happening. So these kinds of experiments were done
and what's shown here in figure 4.10 is an experiment where a tagged sodium
molecule was allowed to flux across the plasma membrane due to the activity of
this pump. So sodium was loaded up within a cell and
the efflux of sodium, which represents the activity of the pump, is measured
over time. So, as this experiment unfolds, there is
some discharge of sodium ions that can be measured experimentally.
And if one removes potassium from the medium outside of the cell, now there's a
sudden drop in the activity that's being indicated by the efflux of sodium.
So this suggests that there must be some kind of codependency between the influx
of potassium ions into the cell and the efflux of sodium.
Well when potassium is restored and the fluids around the cell, now the rate of
discharge of sodium is restored. But now a key experiment, is imposed upon
this model system. the energy that's required to drive this
activity is depleted by adding a compound which blocks the synthesis of adenosine
triphosphate, which is the main energy currency for active cells.
And as this metabolic poison, if you will, is introduced there is a
precipitous decline in the efflux of sodium ions providing strong evidence for
the energy requirement of this transport. When ATP is restored then there is a,
somewhat rapid rise again of the efflux of sodium back towards the rate at which
this experiment was run. So taking these two phases of the
experiment together we know that there's some kind of codependency between the
Influx of potassium and the efflux of sodium.
And we also know that this process is energy dependent.
So these kinds of experiments have lead to the following model.
there is some kind of integral membrane protein that constitutes a pump for
sodium and potassium. And this integral membrane protein has
enzymatic activity that can cleave ATP. And consume energy in the form of
breaking that high-energy phosphate bond. So, we have good reason to believe that
there is a configuration of this protein that allows for the binding of sodium
ions to the exposed cytoplasmic domain within the central region of this
integral membrane protein. And there seems to be a particular
stoichiometry. To the transport of sodium and potassium.
We think they're likely three binding sites for sodium ions that are available
in this configuration. And then with the consumption of energy,
in the form of cleaving this high energy phosphate bond from ATP.
There's a conformational change such that this protein appears to flip within the
membrane. We don't know exactly how this happens,
but it seems to change conformation, allowing these three sodium ions now to
be discharged on the extra-cellular face of the membrane.
And at the same time, this conformational change has exposed, now, binding sites
for potassium ions. Now, with the binding of these potassium
ions, the unorganic phosphate is lost. And a conformational change occurs.
And we are restored to the starting configuration of this protein.
And this allows for these potassium ions now to be discharged and enter the
extracellular space. So now this protein is ready to return to
its starting position in this schema where sodium ions can aggregate.
So with the consumption of a high energy phosphate bond, there is a cycle of this
pump that transports three sodium ions from inside the cell to outside the cell
while at the same time allowing for two potassium ions to travel from outside of
the cell to the interior. So as this pump churns and burns energy,
we establish a concentration gradient, with higher sodium ions outside of the
cell compared to inside. And higher potassium concentrations
inside the cell compared to outside. All of this requires energy.
Now, notice the stoichiometry. There's more positive charge leaving the
cell than entering the cell with each turn of the cycle.
From this point of view, we say that this pump activity is electrogenic, that is it
has the potential to generate a small current.
That current typically is negligible unless we're talking about a very small
compartment, where the concentrations of ions might actually change during the
course of a high frequency burst of action potentials.
Such compartments exist in the smallest of our axons that we find in peripheral
nerves. So, in such situations, as ionic
concentrations might be altered by a burst of action potential activity, pump
activity will increase, more positive charge will leave the cell as a result of
the pump, and the inside of the cell will hyperpolarize.
So that would be the impact of this electrogenic nature of pump activity.
Again, it's typically negligible, except for the very smallest of axons, or the
very tightest of compartments where pump activity can have an impact on the
resting membrane potential. Well, we can summarize and have an
opportunity to review these mechanisms of pump activity by viewing an animation
from chapter four. You can follow this animation by
navigating to the website that supports our textbook or by clicking on the
hyperlink that you have available to you at the bottom of your tutorial notes.
Well, I hope this has been helpful. Our next tutorial will focus on the means
by which electrical signals can propagate along an axon.
And we will return to some of these concepts related to the structure of ion
channels and pumps when we consider synaptic neuro transmission, in forth
coming tutorials.