Welcome back to this next tutorial in our
series on the changing brain. Today we're going to talk about the
construction of neural circuits. And this topic will pertain to three of
our core concepts in the field of neuroscience.
Again, we're going to be talking about a different kind of Neuronal communication
communication that is mediated chemically.
But in this session, we're going to begin to introduce the concept of building
synaptic connections. And that will enable both chemical and
electrical communication to be possible in developing neural circuits.
So we're going to see the genesis of this very important core concept in the field
of neuroscience today as we consider the construction of circuitry.
We're going to talk about circuits that are in large meder, measure genetically
determined, circuits that provide the foundation for behavior.
such as the ability to detect potentially painful and damaging stimuli in our skin
surfaces. And then lastly, we'll set the stage for
a more rich discussion that I hope to have with you in our next tutorial about
how life experiences can modify the structure and function of the central
nervous system. And I'd like to introduce a hypothesis
really that will allow us to understand how can chemical signals that have the
ability to change the course of neural development be modulated by activity?
And this hypothesis will then help us understand how life experience can change
the structure and function of the brain. Okay, well lets consider the learning
objectives that I have for you in this tutorial.
I want you to be able to understand what is a principal organelle that is
responsible for pathfinding in developing axons.
As well as the, growth of dendritic arbors.
And this structure is called a growth cone.
So I want you to be able to characterize the structure and function of growth
cones. I want you to be able to discuss the
major classes of signaling molecules. That guide axonal growth in the
developing brain. And I want you to be able to have a
cogent discussion of neural trophins. And I want you to be able to discuss the
mechanisms of neural trophin signaling. Well hopefully all of these topics will
make sense to you after spending a little time with me in this tutorial.
So let's jump right into it. Well, I would remind you of our broad
framework for understanding the forces that influence the developing brain.
we talked, quite a bit in our last tutorial about the concept of nature in
brain development. That is, the lineage-derived signals that
result from the expression of particular genes.
And so this influence in brain development can be considered genetic
specification. Well, today we're going to talk about the
construction of neural circuits, which begins to engage our two other major sets
of factors that influence the finally shape and structure and function of
neural circuits. Well, if indeed there is ever a final
shape to them. What I have in mind is self-organization.
Self-organization is mediated via activity based Mechanisms that play out
as cells acquire the capacity to generate electrical signals.
And that begins to shape the expression of a varierty of [UNKNOWN] types that
circuits begin to acquire as they build otu their connections.
Well as the developing embryo, fetus, and then to post natal life, developing
infant begns to interact with the environment.
Then, sensory motor experience becomes an important shaper of circuitry in an
ongoing phase of circuit construction that continues into post-natal life.
So, the story of the construction of neural circuits begins in utero.
It begins at a, relatively, later stage in embryonic development in the third
trimester. But it will continue, well into post
natal life. So many of the mechanisms we'll be
talking about today reflect nature. That is, genetic specification.
However we will begin to describe some of those factors that play an important role
in mediating the influence of nurture. And again that's going to be more
primarily the topic of the next tutorial in this series.
Okay. Well.
With that as a broad introduction, let's talk about some of these mechanisms that
pertain to genetic specification and self-organization in early brain
development. Mechanisms that will shape the growth and
the viability of neurons and their connections in the developing central
nervous system. Well the first set of mechanisms that
play out establish polarity in the developing neuroblast.
Now, you'll recall that the neuroblast is derived from epithelium and all
epithelial cells acquire a polarity, that is there's an epithelium, surface and a
basal surface to their cells. And, this process plays out in developing
neuroblasts, although their apical and basal surfaces are increasingly difficult
to recognize, because increasingly these cells no longer resemble the columnar
epithelium that first established the neuroectoderm.
Nevertheless, theer os the establsihment of polarity such that from the apical
surface, of the developing neuroBlack, an axon will emerge and from a basal
surface, dendritic branches will begin to grow out.
Now initially, with the out growth of these processes, we really can't.
Tell whether they are destined to become axon or dendrite, we simply call them
neurites. But as development progresses, a single
axon becomes recognizable and differentiated from the apical aspect of
the neuroblasts, and that axon begins to acquire a distinctive organelle.
At the growing tip of that axon. That's a structure that we call the
growth cone. Let's spend some time together thinking
about the growth cone, and what makes it such an important structure in the
finding of axonal pathways in the developing brain.
Well, if one were to look at the tip of an axon that is emerging let's say from a
cell body somewhere in this direction. One would find that there is a large,
flattened structure that begins to develop as that axon begins to
differentiate from just a neurite that might be extending away from this
neuroblast. So this structure, is what we call the
growth cone. And its charecterized by a fairly flat
laminar type of appearance. We call this a lamella podium or a sheet
foot, that's one way to understand that term.
And then from that lamellipodium extend these long finger like processes called
filopodia. Now what we're seeing in this figure is
an illustration zooming in just on one portion of the growth cone looking at a
filopodia. And this allows us to understand just a
little bit about the dynamics that shape this growth cone as it interacts with the
environment of the developing embryo. So what we find in this labella podium is
a rich supply of mitochondria to supply the energy that's necessary for the
activity of the growth cone. We also find a variety of filaments.
We find actin filaments that assemble in the philopodium, and this allows that
philopodium to have a highly dynamic behavior as actin polymers are assembled.
From the monomeric elements. So, the assembly of those filaments is
responsible for the protusion of a phyllopodium.
And then the disassembly of those filaments allows for the retraction of a
phyllopodium. Meanwhile, microtubules are being
assembled and disassembled in the lamellipodium.
So, all of the machinery that's necessary for the construction and deconstruction
of these filaments, needs to be synthesized and then localized to this
growth cone. Now, these processes are responding to
signals in the environment through which this growth cone is exploring.
And those signals are tranduced via a variety of receptors that are present
within the leading edge of this growth cone.
So for example, one can find a variety of channels, including our transcient
receptor potential channels that can mediate the interaction of this growth
cone with chemical signals in the environment.
There are other means by which calcium can enter this lamellipodium.
And as you know calcium is a very important second messenger system within
all cells, and in particular within developing neurons.
So calcium becomes a key mediator of the events that are detected at the plasma
membrane of the growth cone which then are transduced into changes in the
structure and growth patterns of this growth cone.
So, this entire growth cone is a highly modeled structure, so this growth cone
can explore the environment. Within which this axon might be
proceeding. It can decide that it needs to change
directions. Perhaps retract from growth in one
direction, and begin to extend growth in a different direction, perhaps an
othoganal direction to the original pattern of growth.
So there is a tremendous amount of dinamism associated with this growth cone
as it actively explores the environment responding to chemical signals.
And sometimes there is an important point of decision, is there not?
There are what we might call forks in the road.
For a developing axon that's pioneering a pathway.
We think of these forks in a, in the road in particular at the midline of the
developing embryo. Where a variety of exonal projections
must make a choice. To cross the midline or not to cross the
midline. Well, I thought this might be a helpful
point to insert a study question to challenge you to review some of what you
know about anatomical pathways. mainly those that you learned in unit 3
of the course. So, let's just pause for a moment here,
and take on the following study question.