Well, let me say just a little bit more
in, conclusion, as we wrap up this tutorial on the gustatory system.
About the distribution of these taste receptors across the surface of the
tongue. Now, I think we once had a fairly rigid
view of the topography. Of the distribution of taste receptors.
We now recognize that there are taste cells that express different taste
receptors. And these zones across the surface of the
tongue are not absolute, nevertheless it remains the case that our taste cells
that are especially sensitive to salty tastants.
Tend to be distributed in the anterior and lateral parts of the tongue.
the same is true, for those, receptors that are going to be sensitive to sweet
stimuli, as well, as the amino acids, like monosodium glutamate.
Whereas, those tastants sense that are going to interact with receptors for
bitter tastes. These tend to be distributed more in the
posterior part of the tongue. So we can imagine that salty and sweet
would be conveyed primarily by cranial nerve 7, the facial nerve.
Whereas sensations about bitter. Will be conveyed by cranial nerve 9,
which provides innervation to the posterior third of the tongue.
And then finally, our sensations of sour tend to be distributed primarily in the
lateral flanks of the tongue. So, again, there's, there's a bias in the
distribution of these taste cells that express these different receptors but the
bias does not lead to an absolute topography for taste.
Well, there's some clinical significance and functional significance here, for
example, if you're going to test a patient's sensitivity to taste, something
you want to make sure that you apply that sweet.
Stimulus to the anterior part of the tongue, the tip of the tongue.
if you're testing for the sensitivity to something that we consider bitter like
quinine for example, you're going to want to make sure that that tastant gets
to the posterior part of the tongue. Well another point I would make about
this topography. Of the distribution of taste receptors is
that receptors in different regions of the tongue.
That is receptors that are sensitive to different kinds of tastants, operate over
different concentration regions of those tastants in the ingested food and drink
that we consume. And I think there is a good logic to
this. So, for example, if we are about to
ingest a food that can cause us some harm, it makes quite good sense for our
gustatory system, even at the level of sensory transduction.
To be especially sensitive to that potentially harmful stimulus.
Well many of the tastants that we might encounter in nature that can do us some
harm are those that activate our bitter taste receptors that are found in the
posterior part of the tongue. And these receptors are exquisitely
sensitive to even very, very small concentrations of tastants in the food,
in the liquid that we ingest. These tastants are sensitive down to the
nanomolar range of sensitivity. So we can pretty easily detect them in
ingested foods and we can respond appropriately.
and that response might involve some kind of integration of gustatory and visceral
sensory signals and the production of the appropriate motor act that might involve
expelling that substance from our oral pharynx.
Now, on the other hand, there are those foods that are not likely to do us so
much harm. Unless of course we ingest them in
extremely large quantities and I'm thinking about salty and especially sweet
sensations. And the receptors for these tastants tend
to operate in a different dynamic range. Our sensations to sweet and salty tend to
be derived with millimolar. Concentrations of those tastants in the
food that we ingest. So I think there's a certain logic here.
So substances that do us harm, we're extremely sensitive to, with a low
threshold for detection. Whereas those substances that we might
consider to be appropriate nutrients, salts, carbohydrates, sugars, these sorts
of compounds we actually need to ingest in sizable amounts to keep our bodies
working. Of course we can abuse that and run into
problems with excessive consumption. But the higher detection threshold for
salts and for sweets seems to ensure that at least we will consume in adequate
supply when that supply is readily available.
So we can see that even at the preferal end of the gustatory system there is a
physiological and adaptive tuning of the sensitivity of our receptor cells.
For those compounds that will either do us some harm or do us some good.
Well, the last topic I'd like to speak about is the coding of information in the
gustatory system. So, there generally is a proportional
relationship to the concentration of the tastant and the activity and the.
first order axons, that enter the brain stem, so coding is based in part, on
frequency. coding is also based on the topography of
the taste receptors, as is roughly illustrated here in this slide.
And this distribution provides the foundation for what we might call labeled
line means of coating. And this means that a certain axon in one
of these three cranial nerves is going to be signaling the presence of a particular
tastant. Because of the specializations of the
receptor that, that axon innervates and those specializations include what taste
receptor is expressed. So, obviously an axon of cranial nerve 7
that supplies the anterior two thirds of the tongue, might supply a sweet
receptor. One of those g protein coupled receptors
that is tuned for sugar molecules. Well, that labels this axon, as
representing sweet. So whenever that axon fires an action
potential and conveys that signal into the brain stem, the brain stem is, is now
receiving input about the presence of a sweet tastant.
So this is what we call a labeled-line code.
And again, we encountered this concept in the somatic sensory system.
And, well to some degree, I think we see evidence of labeled-line coding in all of
the sensory systems. And again, it refers to the idea that the
line, or the pathway, from peripheral receptor into the brain, is labeled based
on the presence of particular receptors, that accomplish the sensory transduction
process. So in this case we might recognize axons
in those cranial nerves that are labeled for the presence of sour, bitter, salty,
sweet and then this amino acid taste that we associate with monosodium glutamate.
Well once this information gets into the central nervous system it's not yet so
clear exactly how it's being processed. So the identity of these tastants, seems
to be preserved in the relays from the nucleus of the solitary tract, into the
ventral posterior medial complex of the thalamus.
And then up into our taste areas in the insular cortex.
But once we get to higher order areas, especially in the orbital cortex of the
brain. There, there really isn't anything that
we would recognize as a map of the sensory surface, or a map of tastants.
Rather, what becomes increasingly important in representation is the
hedonic value of the food. That is, do we find this tastant
pleasurable, or do we find this tastant producing an aversive response.
So, at, at some level of processing we seem to be less concerned about the
identity of the tastant and more concerned about how it impacts motivated
behavior. Well, all this talk about the chemical
senses, they're certainly making me hungry.
So, I think I need to activate a few of my taste cells here, so, don't mind me.
And I'll see you in a few minutes. We'll talk more about the chemical senses
and consider the trigeminal chemosensory system.
Mm. This is good, I really needed that.