Okay.
So, I'm going to open up the Brainstem Cross-Sectional Atlas in Sylvius and I'm
going to click on All Structures. And so, this opens up a view of
histological cross-sections of the brainstem that extend all the way into the
spinal cord. So, in a different tutorial I've taken you
through the brainstem. So, what I'm going to do is jump right to
the spinal cord. So, I can do so with my navigational
window to the left, either just pulling the sliders or selecting a thumbnail of
interest. So, what we have here is a cross-section
through the cervical segments of the spinal cord, and we can appreciate that
from our navigational window. But now, I also would expect you to
recognize that based on the large Ventral horns that we see plus the abundance of
white matter that we see around the outside of this gray matter.
And if one looks specifically at the dorsal columns, you'll note that there is
a subdivision. And, of course, with the color code, we
make that easier for you to appreciate. But even without the color code, with a
careful eye, one can denote the presence of a small septum that divides the dorsal
column region into two parts, the medial part and a lateral part.
Alright. And just a few other features of note.
We've already talked about the very large Ventral horns and the Dorsal horn.
We have a very striking region of the Dorsal horn that corresponds to rexed
laminae number 2. And that's a region called the substantia
gelatinosa. And that's this very bright region here in
this section that's made to look like a myelin stain.
It's bright, because there is a compact zone of small cells with lots of synaptic
inputs. And not much myelin in this region of the
dorsal horn. Now, if the, in the surrounding white
matter, I'd point out a few prominent features.
I mentioned one major descending pathway. This is the lateral corticospinal tract.
So, this is a major means by which the motor cortex sends motor command signals
down to the circuits of motor neurons in the spinal cod.
So, I'm just going to make sure this is selected and just allow you to see through
the thumbnails. And, so, this allows you to note how the
corticospinal tract gets smaller and smaller and smaller as we go from superior
to inferior levels of the spinal cord. Okay, back up to the cervical enlargement.
And we're ready to move on now to look at the thoracic cord.
So, think about what, what's going to be the difference between the thoracic cord
and the cervical cord that in front of us right now?
Well, hopefully, you have in mind a couple of things, maybe a small reduction in the
amount of white matter that we would see, but perhaps a large reduction in the size
of the Ventral horn, because we know that the thoracic horn doesn't have to supply
motor neurons that govern an appendage, so we would expect a smaller Ventral horn
there. But you should also now think about the
lateral horn which is a distinctive feature of the thoracic cord.
So, it's sectioned down one level, and sure enough, we have less gray matter in
the ventral horn, and we have a prominent lateral horn, which is mainly there
because of a column of cells that are preganglionic sympathetic neurons.
That column is called the intermedial lateral cell column, and it is essentially
why there is a lateral horn in the thoracic cord.
We still have a Dorsal horn. We still have a beautiful substantia
gelatinosa. And we still have quite a bit of white
matter, because we are still relatively high in the spinal cord at this level, but
as we get down to the lumbar enlargement, now, the relative proportions of white
matter to gray matter seem to be quite different.
There's less white matter in absolute terms, but there really is a dramatic
difference in the apparent ratio of white matter to gray matter.
That's because we're, we're losing white matter but we also are now adding a very
large Ventral horn that accommodates the muscle mass of the lower extremities.
So, we have a prominent Ventral horn of course, we would expect a sizable Dorsal
horn receiving sensory signals from the mass of our lower extremities.
And then in the dorsal column, I would just highlight for you the fact that we
don't have a subdivision that we saw in the cervical and even the upper thoracic
cords in the Dorsal column. But just a single Dorsal column system,
which is called the gracile tract. So, if I select that, and now we can work
our way back up the spinal cord, you'll see how the gracile tract is present in
the more medial aspects of the Dorsal horn, whereas, this lateral region is
called the cuneate tract. The cuneate tract basically accounts for
the addition of sensory axons from the upper extremities.
Alright. So, returning to the lumbosacral
enlargement, and now we can progress to our most inferior section, which is from
the sacral cords. So now, again, a even greater disparity
between the relative amounts of white matter and gray matter.
We still have a large Ventral horn because we're still in the region of the
lumbosacral enlargement serving the lower extremities.
We still have a prominent Dorsal horn. But we have much less white matter.
That's especially evident in a smaller lateral cortical spinal tract that we have
in this region. As we're nearly below now, the level of
gray matter that is going to be subject to the control of our volition.
That's one way to think about this lateral cortical spinal tract, that it represents
the motor cortex's command capacity over the output of the spinal cord.
Well, I think that will do it for this tutorial.
I hope this is giving you a helpful means of orienting your conceptual knowledge
about the organization of the spinal cord to the actual appearance of this beautiful
structure in histological sections.