Of lower motor neuronal control of
movement by considering the clinical picture of individuals that have suffered
damage to their lower motor neurons. To their spinal nerves, or to the
circuits that govern the output of those lower motor neurons.
This is called the Lower Motor Neuron Syndrome.
So my learning objective for you is simply to characterize the signs
associated with Lower Motor Neurons. So this Lower Motor Neuron Syndrome has
several components to it that I want you to be able to recognize.
If we section the nerve that supplies the skeletal muscle or if we injure the
ventral horn of the spinal cord where the cell bodies of those neurons reside.
We will see a response in the muscle tissue, over time that muscle will
atrophy. But along the way we might see abnormal
contractions of individual muscle fibers and of individual muscle units.
And these abnormal contractions we call fibrillations and fasciculations.
So a fibrillation refers to the contraction of an individual muscle
fiber. A fasciculation would be the contraction
of the muscle fibers of a motor unit. And this is a pathological sign.
It inidicates the disrutpion of normal signlaing that comes from the spinal cord
to those muscle fibers. In additon to these changes the reflect
the disrupted physiology to the muscle fiber.
There are changes that are more directly indicitive of damage to the lower motor
neuron itself, or the axon that allows that lower motor neuron to communicate to
that muscle fiber. And these kinds of signs and symptoms are
reflective of the loss of the control of voluntary movement.
So there can be muscle paralysis implying a nearly complete loss of volutional
control. Or if the loss of control is less then
complete there still may be profound weakness.
And we call this Paresis. So the idea is that our brain is sending
signals to the spinal cord commanding a voluntary movement like a contraction and
there's profound weakness there. not because the signals not being
received by the spinal cord necessarily but, rather the output from spinal cord
or perhaps some cranial motor nuclei. To the muscle fiber, itself, is the
problem. Now, going hand in hand with this loss of
volitional control or this profound weakness would be a loss of our myotactic
reflexes. So, this is what we call a Reflexia.
So there may be a sensory arc that's intact but without the output from the
alpha motor neuron to the muscle fiber there can be no reflex.
And with the loss of volitional control with the loss of the reflex we would
expect there to be a profound reduction in muscle tone.
So this is a devestating condition that is very charactistically observed
clinically so one can expcet to see changes in the muscle fiber.
One can expect to see evidence of a dysfunction.
And the reflex arc that supports muscle tone and the execution of voluntary
movement. And you should, as you advance in your
clinical studies, come to recognize this lower motor neuron syndrome and
differentiate it from other kinds of movement disorders.
One important differentiation that we'll be making, in a set of tutorials that
will be forthcoming, will be a distinction between the lower motor
neuron syndrome and the upper motor neuron syndrome.
What you'll discover is that in the hours to days after damage to upper motor
neurons, the patient might look very much like a person who has suffered a lower
motor neuron injury. But over time, a different set of signs
and symptoms will evolve and that evolution will be a key feature to focus
in on. So, in addition to thinking about the
anatomy that's been injured, you should also recognize that time course of the
development of that injury. Even for the lower motor neuron sign for
example, it will take some time for muscle atrophy to set in.
You won't see that right away, likewise the fibrillations and fasciculations tend
to be indicative of the early phases of injury.
Over time those will subside as the muscle fibers become atrophic.
So, paying attention to the time course of the development of these signs and
symptoms, and how they may change is going to be a key aspect of your clinical
observation. Well, this concludes our discussion of
lower motor neurons. the next time we come together.
I trust we weill be talking about the means by which upper motor neurons govern
the activites of our alpha motor neurons and the local circuit neurons that
coordinate their output. So next time we'll be talking about upper
motor neuronal control of movement. I'll see you then.