Well, welcome back to this final part of
our tutorial on the visceral motor system.
And, I feel much better now that I've taken care of my full bladder.
I hope you don't mind us talking frankly about this rather base physiological
system but it is an important system nevertheless.
It's one that has been very important in the evolution of, of mammals that have
used chemical signals in urine as a means for social communication, and it remains
an important aspect of human behavior. in fact, so much so that I think there's
some really fascinating neuroscience behind the governance of our bladder and
social cognition. So I'm going to reflect upon that just a
little bit as we go along. But really, my primary goal is to use the
governance of the bladder and the control of the motor acts that are necessary to
void urine as a way to illustrate the integrated action of the visceral motor
system and the somatic motor system. Well, okay, so let's get into this
session. And as we do we will, of course,
immediately once again appreciate the complexity of the brain and its extension
into the spinal cord as the body's most complex organ system.
And we will again be highlighting circuitry that provide for the foundation
of human behavior. In this case a very particular human
behavior that I hope you will appreciate in a new way as a result of this segment
of our tutorial. So, my learning objective for you in this
part, is that I want you to be able to discuss the interplay among the
sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the visceral motor system.
Together with the volitional somatic motor system in the control of
micturition. Well, just to be clear, what we're
talking about is urination. It's voiding the bladder expelling urine
from our bodies. Well, as I said, this isn't perhaps the
most pleasant of topics to spend time together, especially given the diversity
of life histories and social values and social norms that I'm sure are
represented in our learning community. But again, it provides a wonderful
opportunity to illustrate the operations of the central nervous system,
controlling human behavior. Well, let's identify the key principles
that are involved in coordinating the activities of the bladder.
And then we'll talk about how they are regulated, in order to fill the bladder
with urine, and then how to expel that urine from the bladder.
So here's an illustration using the male form as our model illustrating the
various neural elements that are conveying sensory signals from the
periphery and motor signals out to peripheral structures that govern this
process of filling the bladder as well as voiding the bladder.
Well let's begin on the sensory side. So as we can see, there are sensory
afferents that grow out from dorsal root ganglion cells, that innervate the walls
of the bladder and these sensory signals are mechano-sensory receptors that are
sensitive to the stretch that is imposed upon the bladder as it fills with urine.
There are also chemo-sensory elements associated with free nerve endings, or
poly modal c afferents for example, are part of this sensory innervation to the
bladder wall. So we're sensitive not just to the
distension of the bladder, but also to the chemical environment within the lumen
of that bladder. Well these sensory signals then are
conveyed to the appropriate sensory systems.
Here illustrated here would be the anterolateral pathway.
That's conveying the sensory information up to integrative centers in the brain
stem. Well, there are important motor elements
that I want to identify for you. and let's begin with the sympathetic
innervation. That sympathetic innervation is coming
down from integrative centers in the brain stem and in the hypothalamus.
And it reaches this intermediolateral cell column and for control of the
bladder we're talking about the lower part of that cell column in the lower
thoracic, upper lumbar segments and the preganglionic neuron grows an axon, that
reaches one of these pre vertebral ganglia associated with the inferior part
of the pelvis. And there we find the ganglionic neuron
that then supplies innervation to the bladder wall.
Not shown in this illustration, is additional innervation from the
sympathetic ganglia to an internal sphincter muscle that is under the
control of the sympathetic system. And this provides for a way to ensure
bladder filling rather than bladder voiding by governing the contraction of
smooth muscle at the base of the urethra that drains the bladder.
Well finally the parasympathetic division of the visceral motor system is important
has an important role to play in governing the bladder.
the parasympathetic outflow comes from the sacral segments of the spinal cord.
It is receiving input from higher brain centers, which we'll talk about in just a
moment. And the preganglionic neuron, as you
know, will grow a long distance, in this case it will supply a ganglion, that is
very close to the bladder itself. And, that, ganglion will then provide
innervation to the detrusor muscle, which is the principle muscle of the bladder
wall. Now, let's say just a bit about the
functions of these different sources of innervation.
So, the sympathetic innervation to the bladder is going to promote bladder
filling, so it's going to relax the bladder wall.
It's going to contract the internal sphincter muscle, and together that will
allow the bladder to fill. The parasympathetic system on the other
hand is going to promote the emptying of the bladder.
Activation of parasympathetic inputs to the detrusor muscle will cause that
muscle to contract and the bladder to void.
Well in order to actually expel the urine we have to engage not just the visceral
motor system but the somatic motor system and the reason is that there is a somatic
motor efferent that comes from the sacral segments of the spinal cord and
innervates an external sphincter muscle that's in the floor of the pelvis.
And that external sphincter muscle helps to ensure the appropriate and timely
release of urine from the bladder. So this external sphincter helps to
ensure that urine only flows out through the urethra at the appropriate time.
So in order to actually void the bladder, one needs to coordinate not just the
parasympathetic outflow to the bladder wall, but also the somatic motor outflow
to this external sphincter muscle. Okay, so let's see how all this works.
Let's consider first the context of bladder filling.
So bladder filling is going to essentially involve an increase in
sympathetic activity that will dominate parasympathetic activity.
So we're sort of shifting the balance here in favor of sympathetic activity.
So in order to fill the bladder, we have to relax the muscle of the bladder wall,
that detrusor muscle, and so this is a beta adrenergic effect.
And it allows that muscle to relax when norepinephrine is released via these
ganglionic sympathetic neurons. Now, meanwhile, sympathetic activity to
the internal sphincter is going to cause that internal sphincter around the base
of the urethra to contract. This is an alpha adrenergic effect.
So the detrusor muscle's relaxing but the internal sphincter's contracting.
So by increasing the sympathetic activity we promote bladder filling.
So what that means is that we need to relax this detrusor muscle, and we need
to activate this internal sphincter, holding that urine in place within the
bladder. Now during the process of bladder filling
we also want to coordinate the activity of this somatic motor neuron that's
supplying input to this external sphincter exciting that striated muscle
causing it to contract. The more those sensory signals signal the
increase in filling of the bladder the more tone must be generated in that
external sphincter in order to remain continent, in order to retain that urine
within the bladder. But what about bladder voiding?
Well, voiding the bladder means that we have to shift this balance.
So now there needs to be an increase in parasympathetic activity.
Where parasympathetic activity now dominates sympathetic activity.
So for that to happen, we need to increase the tone of the detrusor muscle.
And this is mediated via the muscarinic cholinergic activation of that detrusor
muscle. Meanwhile, we want to decrease the tone
of that internal sphincter. And this seems to be mediated via a
parasympathetic activation of the nitric oxide system.
And this causes that internal sphincter muscle now to relax.
But, what about our somatic motor system? Well, we are not going to void urine
successfully, unless we have a way of decreasing the output of this somatic
motor neuron to that external sphincter muscle.
And indeed this is where descending inputs come into play.
There is an inhibitory interneuron that is in a position to be governed by higher
brain centers and inhibit the tone of that external sphincter muscle.
that muscle needs to relax in order for us to actually void urine from the
bladder. Well, how is all of this coordinated and
governed by higher brain centers? Well I want to walk you through this.
this is a illustration of the neural systems that are engaged when we actually
void urine from the bladder. So, as I just outlined for you, this
involves activation of the parasympathetic system.
Our preganglionic and then our postganglionic neurons causing the
contraction of the bladder and the relaxation of the internal sphincter
muscle. But there's also this inhibition of the
somatic motor neurons which will allow that external sphincter muscle to relax
and the bladder to contract and expel urine out through the urethra.
Well this is all coordinated by some really fascinating networks that involve
the ventral medial forebrain and key integrative centers in the brain stem.
One key center is found in the pons, and it goes by the catchy title, the pontine
micturition center. So, this center needs to be activated in
order to coordinate the lower motor activities that result in successfully
voiding urine from the bladder. So, stimulation of this structure in
experimental animals will produce urination.
And it's on that kind of evidence, as well as, an understating of the anatomy,
that we recognize this as a key center that must be engaged in order to
successfully coordinate this parasympathetic outflow together with the
inhibitory signals that relax the external sphincter muscle.
Well the pontine micturation center is under the influence of neurons in the
peri-aqueductal grey matter. This is a fascinating set of cells that
surround the cerebral aqueduct in the midbrain.
you'll recall that there are networks of cells in this structure that are involved
in producing analgesia, that is, a top-down, means by which we can control
the transmission of pain signals in the spinal cord.
There's also a center in the periaqueductal gray that can produce
locomotion, so different kinds of networks are in this structure.
And here's one that seems to be important in integrating inputs from yet higher
brain centers in governing the output of this pontine micturition center.
Well the periaqueductal gray receives input from the hypothalamus, hopefully no
surprise to you now, as well as the amygdala, and together these structures
are governed by parts of the orbital and medial pre frontal cortex.
Well this is where the story of micturition I think gets really
fascinating because there remains in human cultures still some a social
dimension to voiding urine. In some parts of the world, it's
perfectly fine to void urine in public and to do so, without embarrassment,
without shame. In other cultures, in other societies,
one would not think of voiding urine in public.
So, one can appreciate I think that there is a social dimension to governing the
output of this peri-aqueductal brain, the pontine micturition center.
So, it's not surprising then, that this network in the brain stem should be
controlled by parts of the limbic forebrain that are involved in social
cognition. Indeed, one of our great neuroanatomists
of our time, a Dutch neuroanatomist by the name of Gert Holstege, was bold
enough to publish a paper in the scientific literature that he entitled,
Micturition and the Soul. And I think what Professor Holstege
understands quite well is that there is a certain soulishness about the orbital and
medial prefrontal cortex. And this same part of the brain that
helps to define who we are as a person, as a human being, within a social
context, within a social structure, is also engaged in governing some of our
most basal physiological functions including voiding urine from our bladder.
So, I for one, certainly appreciate Professor Holstege's bold proclamation of
relating the governance of micturition to the neurobiological basis of the human
soul. Well, maybe that's another great topic to
kick to the discussion forum if you wish. So, I look forward to seeing your
thoughts about that. Well, to wrap up our discussion of the
visceral motor system, I hope you'll take away from this an appreciation that the
visceral motor system operates in coordination with our somatic motor
system. It's receiving sensory input, it's
receiving top down signals, even from the highest integrative centers of the
forebrain. Well, I think we're ready to bring a
conclusion to unit four and our consideration now of our means by which
the brain can control movement and mediate various dynamic aspects of human
behavior. Where we're going next in the course is
to step back actually quite a bit back and consider the development of the brain
and the important mechanisms that unfold really across the lifespan that account
for the changes that our brains undergo from conception all the way through
advanced age. Well, finally, we're going to end up
medical neuroscience by talking about human cognition.
That will be the final unit of the course.
Well, the good news is that, I think you've had all of the anatomy that you're
going to get from me. And, now that we've completed our
consideration of our sensory motor systems, what remains in the course is to
actually understand that anatomy in a functional context, in an even deeper
way, by considering its embryo genesis, its change across the life span and how
the sensory motor systems are integrated at the highest levels of human cognition.
Well, we will along the way consider some clinical cases that will help reinforce
your understanding of this functional anatomy.
And how neurological signs and symptoms can help you build a neuro-anatomical
model of the brain of the patient that might be in front of you, or the spinal
cord of that patient and allow you to localize lesions within the central
nervous system based on your holistic appreciation of the function and the
behavior and the experiences of that patient.
Well that's a lofty goal. We'll get there by the end of this course
and I just thought I would pause for a moment here and give you a sense of
perspective as to where we are in that progression.
Well, I do want to leave you, in this part of our tutorial, with a final study
question. And hopefully, that will allow you to
integrate a little bit of what we've been talking about in this session, and maybe
prepare you for the unit quiz that hopefully you are about to embark on.
And I'll see you on the other side of the quiz, when we consider the changing brain
in unit five.