So what we've been talking about so far
are the molecular structures that constitute ion channels and this is a way
of discharging those gradients that are essential for generating electrical
signals. Now, let's turn to the molecular
mechanisms that are responsible for establishing those gradients in the first
place. I mentioned when we first introduced this
topic that those gradients are established by ion pumps and ion
transporters. And here we see a variety of pumps and
transporters. Probably the most important that I should
emphasize is right over here on the left hand side of figure 4.9.
It's the Sodium-Potassium ATPase. This is, arguably the most important
molecule in the nervous system. It seems a little ridiculous to even make
such a claim, but if it were possible to identify one molecule of supreme
importance this would be it Sodium-Potassium ATPase.
It consumes a significant portion of all of the energy that is burnt up in the
function of a nervous system. And it's one of the principal reason why
the brain requires such a constant and highly regulated flow of blood to deliver
oxygen and glucose the principal substrates for oxidative metabolism in
brain tissue. There are other pumps besides the
Sodium-Potassium ATPase. As we see here there are pumps for
calcium. There ion exchangers that move sodium and
calcium and protons. There are co-transporters that can take
advantage of a concentration gradient for one ion to transport another and we don't
need to get into all of this complexity at the present time.
Rather, what I want to do is consider in a little bit more detail, the function
of. Our principal pump, the Sodium-Potassium
ATPase. Now, the story of how this function works
is the result of a lot of empirical research that had been done in various
ways one can imagine based on our prior consideration of the action potential
that one can study this pump by removing either sodium or potassium from the
solution and asking how these manipulations might affect pump activity.
One might also gain some insight by depriving that pump of its supply of
energy to find out what's happening. So these kinds of experiments, were done.
and what's shown here in figure 4.10 is an experiment where a, tagged sodium
molecule was allowed to flux across the plasma membrane, due to the activity of
this pump. So sodium was loaded up within a cell and
the efflux of sodium which represents the activity of the pump is measured over
time. So as this experiment unfolds there is
some discharge of sodium ions that can be measured experimentally.
And if one removes potassium from the medium outside of the cell, now there's a
sudden drop in the activity that's being indicated by the efflux of sodium.
So this suggests that there must be some kind of codependency between the Influx
of potassium ions into the cell, and the efflux of sodium.
Well, when potassium is restored, and the fluid's around the cell.
Now, the rate of discharge of sodium is restored.
But now, a key experiment is imposed upon this model system.
the energy that's required to drive this activity is depleted by adding a compound
which blocks the synthesis of adenosine triphospate which is the main energy
currency for active cells. And, as this metabolic, poison, if you
will, is introduced, there is a precipitous decline in the efflux of
sodium ions providing strong evidence for the energy requirement of this transport.
When ATP is restored, then there is a somewhat rapid rise again of efflux of
sodium, back towards the rate at which this experiment was run.
So taking these two phases of the experiment together, we know that there's
some kind of co-dependency between the influx of potassium and the efflux of
sodium, and we also know that this process is energy dependent.
So these kinds of experiments have led to the following model.
There is some kind of integral membrane protein, that constitutes a pump for
sodium and potassium. And this integral membrane protein has
enzymatic activity that can cleave ATP and consume energy in the form of
breaking that high-energy phosphate bond. So, we have good reason to believe that
there is a configuration of this protein that allows for the binding of sodium
ions to the exposed cytoplasmic domain within the central region of this
integral membrane protein. There seems to be a particular
stoichiometry to the transport of sodium and potassium.
We think there're likely three binding sites for sodium ions that are available
in this configuration. And then with the consumption of energy,
in the form of cleaving this high-energy phosphate bond from ATP, there is a
conformational change, such that this protein appears to flip within the
membrane. We don't know exactly how this happens.
But it seems to change conformation allowing these three sodium ions now to
be discharged. On the extracellular face of the
membrane, and at the same time, this conformational change has exposed now
binding sites for potassium ions. Now, with the binding of these potassium
ions, the inorganic phosphate is lost, and the conformational change occurs.
And we are restored to the starting configuration of this protein.
And this allows for these potassium ions now to be discharged and enter the
intra-cellular space. So now this protein is ready to return to
its starting position. In this schema, where sodium ions can
aggregate. So with the consumption of a high-energy
phosphate bond, there is a cycle of this pump that transports 3 sodium ions from
inside the cell to outside the cell. While at the same time allowing for 2
potassium ions to travel from outside of the cell to the interior.
So as this pump churns and burns energy we establish a concentration gradient
with higher sodium ions outside of the cell compared to inside, and higher
potassium concentrations inside the cell compared to outside.
All of this requires energy. Now, notice the stoichiometry.
There's more positive charge leaving the cell than entering the cell with each
turn of a cycle. From this point of view, we say that this
pump activity is electrogenic, that is, it has the potential to generate a small
current. That current typically is negligible
unless we're talking about a very small compartment where the concentrations of
ions might actually change during the course of a high frequency burst of
action potentials. Such compartments exist in the smallest
of our axons we find in peripheral nerves.
So, in such situations as ionic concentrations might be altered by a burst
of action potential activity, pump activity will increase, more positive
charge will leave the cell as a result of the pump, and the inside of the cell will
hyperpolarize. So that would be the impact of this
electrogenic nature of pump activity. Again, it's typically negligible, except
for the very smallest of axons, or the very tightest of compartments where pump
activity can have an impact on the resting memory potential.
Well we can summarize and have an opportunity to review these mechanisms of
pump activity by viewing a animation from chapter four you can follow this
animation. by navigating to the website that
supports our textbook or by clicking on the hyperlink that you have available to
you at the bottom of your tutorial notes. Well, I hope this has been helpful.
Our next tutorial will focus on the means by which electrical signals can propagate
along an axon. And we will return to some of these
concepts related to the structure of ion channels and pumps when we consider
synaptic neurotransmission in forthcoming tutorials.