Hi, everyone.
Welcome again to my home. It's a nice cool evening.
And really a lovely day here in Durham, North Carolina today.
Maybe you can tell since my last tutorial, I had a hair cut, so I'm especially
feeling the nice, cool weather this evening.
And I'm happy to spend a little bit of time with you, talking to you about
synaptic integration. So we continue to talk about our important
core concept in the field of neuroscience that pertains to the communication that
happens among neurons and between neurons and peripheral structures via the
generation of chemical and electrical signals.
Specifically, our learning objective today is to discuss the concepts of excitatory
postsynaptic potentials and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials.
And, but what I want you to be able to do, do is to be able to define these terms in
terms of the reversal potential. For the postsynaptic current and the
threshold for generating an action potential.
Now, I trust all of that will be clear as we go through the tutorial together.
And secondly, my objective is for you to be able to describe how postsynaptic
potentials. Can summate within a neuron both in space
and in time. Alright well in order to address this
shorter tutorial on this subject tonight I want us to start by reviewing the
mechanisms of chemical synaptic transmission.
Now, you've had a few tutorials so I think things ought to be fairly clear so I'll go
rather quickly through this. As you will recall, an action potential
will invade the end of an axon where we find our presynaptic terminal and a wave
of depolarization then conveys positive charge along the length of this
presynaptic terminal. And once that positivity reaches our
voltage gated calcium channels they will open and calcium can rush into that
presynaptic terminal The calcium in that presynaptic terminal.
Is the key trigger that leads to the fusion of docked vesicles, allowing their
neurotransmitter to then passively diffuse out into the synaptic cleft.
And I'll just remind you that this happens when calcium interacts with synaptotagmin
and that leads to a twisted and pulling together of that snare complex that
results in the fusion of that vesicle. With the presynaptic terminal membrane,
and that fusion of that creates a pore so that the transmitter can diffuse out.
And then once we have a transmitter in the synaptic cleft, then that transmitter can
interact with receptors, in this illustration we have ionotropic receptors.
And that's really going to be our consideration this evening.
You will recall from past tutorials that there are also metabotropic receptors for
transmitters that mediate longer lasting effects.
And, and surely that's part of what we have in mind when we talk about the
integration of postsynaptic signals. But for this tutorial, I want to focus on
the integration of currents that are mediated via the activities of ligand
gated ion channels. And I want us to think about those
currents that are more likely to lead to the generation of an action potential in
this postsynaptic neuron as this wave of depolarization.
Reaches that postsynaptic terminal, or I want us to think about those conductance
that might actually make it less likely for that post-synaptic action potential to
be generated. Okay, so on the one hand, we're going to
talk about action Of neurotransmitters that elicits what we call an excitatory
post-synaptic potential, and on the other, we're going to talk about activities of
neurotransmitters that give rise to what we call an inhibitory post-synaptic
potential. So forgive me if I use that jargon quite a
bit today EPSP and IPSP. This is jargon that we will find
throughout the literature in the world of neuroscience especially as it pertains to
neurophysiology. So, when you hear that EPSP, IPSP think of
excitatory postsynpatic potentials and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials.
So I want us to spend just a little bit of time with what I consider to be a very
important figure from the textbook that we've been reading along with this course
so far. It's figure 5.21, and it pertains to these
concepts of excitatory post-synaptic Potential, inhibitory post-synaptic
potential, and how we can understand and even define those terms relative to the
reversal potential. Remember, that conept that comes way back
when we first introduced the Nernst equation and talked about the equilibrium
potential for permeant ion. Well, we're going to bring back that
concept and now apply it to the conductance that passes through a
ligand-gated ion channel. So what we have illustrated in part A of
this figure is an excitatory post synaptic potential.
So we might think of this as a post synaptic potential that is secondary to
the release of let's say, glutamate from a synapse or maybe a collection of synapses
that are converging upon the same dendrite of a post synaptic neuron.
Well, as glutamate binds to its ionotropic receptors, for example AMPA receptors,
those receptors open and sodium rushes into the cell.
And as a consequence, what we see is a depolarizing event.
We call that depolarizing event an excitatory postsynaptic potential.
So why do we call it that? Well, here's the definition.
The reason why we call it an excitatory postsynaptic potential is that the
reversal potential of the active conductance is well above the threshold
for firing an action potential. Now couple of tutorials ago we looked
closely at the conductance that passed through the nicotinic acid choline
receptor and because both sodium and potassium can pass through that receptor,
the reversal potential. For the net current flow, that is the net
conductance was around zero millivolts. And that's very much the same situation
that we have here for this conductance that is gated by glutamate.
So the reversal potential is about zero millivolts and that's because sodium is
entering the cell through the ampa, ionotropic receptor, and potassium is
leaving the cell. So the voltage that is the membrane
potential at which there's no net current flow, is zero millivolts.
Okay, so what does that mean for this particular synapse that has this effect on
this neuron? Well, what this means is that if this
synapse, if this input to this cell in question, from which we are recording, if
this synapse could have its way with that neuron and pardon me for that language,
but I think it helps. If that synapse can have its way with that
post-synaptic neuron, that post-synaptic neuron will be depolarized to the reversal
potential of that active conductance Now, this synapse doesn't have its way, because
it's like most synapses in the brain, a weak synapse.
Maybe there's not a lot of glutamate that's being released.
Maybe there aren't a lot of AMPA receptors to receive that glutamate.
However, the reversal potential for the AMPA mediated conductance is near zero
millivolts. So that means that if this particular
synapse could completely capture that post synaptic neuron.
It would depolarize it to the reversal potential.
Well, as I just mentioned most synapses are not that powerful.
They're actually, actually rather weak. And they typically only allow for a post
synaptic membrane to depolarize by a few millivolts.
And that's the story that we have here. If there is a single active glutamate
synapse even a very strong and powerful glutamate synapse, we may only see an
excitatory postsynaptic potential of some modest value.
But if we imagine the concurrent stimulation of a number of inputs we might
very well Have a depolarization that hits that threshold for firing an action
potential. So, do you remember what threshold is?
Threshold is when more Sodium ions are rushing into the cell than potassium ions
are leaving the cell. When we reach that threshold, then an
action potential can fire. Okay, so let's put this together now.
So, we activate a glutamatorgic synapse or perhaps, a collection of glutamatorgic
synapses on this cell. The cell begins to depolarize because
sodium is rushing in to the cell through the AMPA receptor channel.
And its reversal potential is around zero millivolts.
So, we've got a large conductance, because the channel is open, and we've got a large
driving force, right, because we're pretty far away from that reversal of potential
when we start at rest. Well, as this cell begins to depolarize,
now we start opening up our voltage gated sodium channel.
And that's what leads to triggering this action potential that we record here,
okay? So the binding of glutamate to the AMPA
receptor is what gets us started and then the action potential is generated through
the usual means, through voltage gated sodium channels.
Accounting for the sharp rising phase and then sodium channel inactivation begins
the falling phase. That gets reinforced with the opening, the
slower opening of the voltage gated potassium channels.
Alright, that is a typical glutamate synapse within the brain.
Now, let's consider a different neurotransmitter, the neurotransmitter
GABA, gamma amino butyric acid. Now, if you remember, GABA binds to a
receptor that's part of an ionotropic receptor and that receptor's permeable to
chloride ions. And in most mature brain cells there's
more chloride outside then inside so that means when the chloride channel is open.
Chloride ions are going to want to enter the cell, okay?
And if we are making the inside of the cell more negative because of the influx
of chloride ions, we might expect some hyperpolarization.
And that's exactly what we see here. If we activate a GABA synapse, there may
be a small hyperpolarization. And the reason is that we are trying to
drive that post synaptic membrane to the reversal potential of the active
conductants. Same principle that we talked about for
the glutamatergic synapse only now we're applying it to the situation of a GABA
synapse. So notice where the reversal potential is
for this particular neuron in question. It's actually hyperpolarized relative to
rest. So, when the conductance opens, the
concentration gradient is such that it will.
Hyperpolarized by a few millivolts this membrane potential.
That's what we call an inhibitory postsynaptic potential, not because it's
hyperpolarizing but because the reversal potential is below threshold.
All right, just to reinforce that point, let's look at the third example.
This also is a GABA synapse. Only because of the concentration
gradients inside and outside this particular cell.
The reversal potential for the active conductance is actually in the
depolarizing direction. But get this.
It's still. An inhibitory post synaptic potential.
Why? Because the reversal potential of the
active conductance is below threshold. Okay?
I hope you're catching onto this. So, again, let me use that, somewhat loose
language of saying. If that synapse with that particular
conductance could have its way with the post synaptic neuron.
It would clamp. The membrane potential of the postsynaptic
neuron at the reversal potential, okay? No more, no less, at the reversal
potential. So, in theory, the most depolarized this
neuron, shown in panel C, could ever possibly get with this active conductance
is the reversal potential Which is below threshold.
So what we see, in fact, is when we activate that synapse a depolarizing post
synaptic potential, but it's still an inhibitory post synaptic potential.
So please don't make the association of depolarization with excitatory post
synaptic potential because you'll be missing the concept entirely.
I want you to associate the idea that the reversal potential of the active
conductance is what defines a postsynaptic response as being an EPSP or an IPSP.
So, if the reversal potential of the active conductance is above threshold,
then that is excitatory postsynaptic potential.
If the reversal potential of the active conductance is.
Low threshold and that is a inhibitory post-synaptic potential.
Now if you're following along with the tutorial handout that I've given you I'm
asking you a question at this point. I'm asking you can the same
neuro-transmitter. Give rise to excitatory postsynaptic
potentials and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials.
Well, the answer is yes and the reason has to do with the definitions that I've just
given you. Which are illustrated over here in panel
D. So, if the difference between an EPSP and
an IPSP is the reversal potential, then you should now have some intuition that
tells you that the reversal potential is really a function.
Of the concentration gradient of the permeate ion.
So suppose that concentration gradient were reversed.
Well we may take a reversal potential that is above threshold and now place it below
threshold. Or vice versa.
Well this is the case for GABA. Gaba is usually described as the Principal
inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. But, about 10 or 15 years ago we realized
that this might not be the case in the developing brain, and here's why.
When we look at the pumps for establishing chloride gradients in the developing
brain, we realize that there is actually a difference.
There's a bit of a switch that takes place.
During brain development at least for most neurons in the model species for which
this has been studied so far. What we find is a particular type of
chloride transfer that is expressed in immature neurons and then as these neurons
grow up a bit, a different Transporter is expressed, and that transporter reverses
the chloride gradient. So in an immature neuron, we typically
have high chloride concentrations in the cytoplasm and low chloride concentrations
In the extra cellular spaces. But once this gene switch is turned on a
different type of transporter is now inserted into the membrane as the neurons
develop in post natal life Now, we have low chloride concentrations within the
cytoplasm. And much higher chloride concentrations
outside of the cell. And this has a very predictable impact on
the reversal potential of the GABA a channel conductor dense.
The reversal potential in the immature neuron is above firing threshold for most
neurons, whereas, following the reversal of that gradient as neu-, neurons get
older and more mature, we find that the reversal potential for This concentration
gradient of chloride now falls below threshold.
So in the immature neuron, GABA is an excitatory neurotransmitter, mediating
excitatory postsynaptic potentials. But in the mature neuron, GABA typically
Is going to mediate inhibitory post synaptic potentials, okay?
And again, the key difference is the expression of different transporters that
can change the gradient for the permeate ion.
Here's some electrophysiological data that makes this point.
In the left part of panel, C is a recording from a 6 day old neuron in a
mouse. And what we find is that with application
of GABA. There is a series of action potentials
that rise upon this envelope of depolarization.
This is an EPSP leading to the generation of action potentials.
Now, if we were to wait a few days later As these neurons mature and apply GABA,
now we see that there is a hyper polarization of the membrane.
And the difference is a pump that reverses the gradient from high intracellular
chloride levels to low intracellular chloride levels across the first few weeks
of postnatal life, at least in the mouse model.
We have every reason to believe that the same biology is happening in the human
brain during development. We just don't yet know exactly when that
shift in expression of chloride transporters takes place.
Alright, now I'd like to switch gears just a little bit now, and talk about the
integration of excitatory postsynaptic potentials and inhibitory post-synaptic
potentials, and in figure 5.22, we see a very simplified representation of what we
find in the brain. We have a postsynaptic neuron that's
receiving, a number of inputs, we're illustrating three of them here.
So, we have an excitatory input that we're, we call E1, another excitatory
input that we call E2 and then, and inhibitory Input.
Now of course if we're talking about a typical brain cell, there would be
thousands of these inputs, some of which would be excitatory, some of which would
be inhibitory. But we're going to keep things real simple
and only talk about three. So, let's consider what would happen if
either that first or the second excitatory input alone were to fire an actual
potential. Most likely what we would see is a
subthreshold depolarization. So that's what we have here if the
activate either of these two inputs. We have small depolarization of a few
millivolts and this really is more typical of what we see in the brain.
No one synpase is that strong. So in order to achieve firing threshold
for the generation of inaction potential, we need to have multiple excitatory inputs
summate their post-synaptic potentials in the same region of the dendrite at the
same time. This is what we call summation.
So, look at what happens if we activate excitatory input 1 and 2 concurrently.
Now we can generate a post-synaptic potential that sums up, and the sum of
these two potentials is sufficient to achieve action potential generation
threshold, and as a result we have this nice action potential that fires, okay.
Well, let's now think about our inhibitory input that we have on this neuron.
So, let's imagine this is an input releasing GABA and let's imagine it's a
mature neuron. So, when the GABA A receptor channel
opens, chloride is going to rush into the cell and that very well could cause a
hyperpolarization of that neuron and in fact that's exactly what we see here.
When we activate input I, the inhibiory input, we see a small inhibitory post
synaptic potential and again, it didn't matter if it was hyperpolarizing or
de-polarizing as long as the reversal potential.
The active conductance was below threshold, it could be here, or it could
have here, but as long as it's below the threshold, then it will be an inhibitory
postsynapitc potential. Okay, well now let's get a bit more
realistic, let's have both aciditory and inhibitory inputs firing more ore less at
the same time. And what we see is that these imputs will
sum algebraically. So if we add one excitatory, one
inhibitory input together then the result is going to be the summation of the two.
And in this example anyway, we will see at best a subthreshold depolarization.
That might still be the case if we were to add the two excitatory together with an,
an inhibitor. So I think you get the idea here, that is
that no one synapse is typically strong enough to result in the generation of an
action potential in the post synaptic neuron.
But we need to have many synapses. Perhaps even tens or hundreds or, or
thousands of excitatory inputs converging on the same neuron at the same time in
order to depolarize that membrane sufficiently to reach threshold.
Because we can be sure that there's probably some inhibitory activity that's
converging at the same time as well. So we have to overcome the impact of that
inhibitory input even while we summate our excitatory inputs to achieve threshold.
I am distracted to my left just for a moment, it sounds like a deer has just
walked by, it's dark enough so that I can't see him.
Could be an opossum, but it sounds like a deer.
Actually I think it is an opossum. Well, this brings us to the end of this
shorter tutorial and I hope it helps you put these concepts of excitation and
inhibition in context. And I hope it allows you to better
understand the neurophysiology of real neurons in the brain.
Okay, so when we talk next time, we will be exploring together the fascinating
phenomenon of synaptic plasticity. I can't wait to have that conversation
with you all.