Welcome back to our discussion of upper
motor neuronal control systems. I'd like to turn now to the clinical
picture of what you'll discover in an individual that has had damage to their
upper motor neurons, or the connections between upper and lower motor neurons.
So, my learning objective for you is that I want you to be able to discuss the
signs associated with damaged upper motor neurons.
Well, for those of you heading into the health professions, it will be critical
for you to understand the difference between the signs and symptoms associated
with lower motor neuron injury and those associated with upper motor neuron
injury. And the problem here is time, and that is
shortly after damaged are pro-motor neurons.
The patient might present with signs and symptoms that resemble those associated
with a lower model neuron injury. what is observed with people in the first
few hours to days, possibly as long as a week, following damage to upper motor
neurons is a phenomenon called spinal shock.
Spinal shock refers to an apparent failure of lower motor circuits to
provide output to skeletal muscle. As a result, the patients are profoundly
weak, the muscles appear to be flaccid, and the tone of the reflexes appears to
be significantly reduced. These are all signs and symptoms that
might be interpreted as a lower motor neuron injury.
However, over time, as those first few hours to days to probably, the second
week after the injury, we see a quite different clinical picture.
Those flaccid muscles have now become spastic.
The low muscle tone has now increased significantly, such that there's actually
pathological tone. Too much tone in those muscles.
And those reflexes that, soon after the injury, were essentially flat.
Now, are actually hypertonic. That is, they're hyper reflexive.
So, let's compare our lower motor signs with our upper motor signs.
Assuming now that some time has passed, and this initial period of spinal shock
has abated. So what we would see is, in the upper
motor neuron syndrome, yes we'd see weakness, which is also seen with lower
motor neuron injury, but rather then seeing a decrease in reflexes, we would
see spasticity. And spasticity involves an increase in
muscle tone, an increase in deep tendon reflexes, and the phenomenon of clonus.
Which means that, with a quick stretch of a joint, this is typically tested in the
ankle joint one might see a oscillatory movement or beating around that joint,
more than about 2 or 3 cycles. this is an, a sign associated with the
spasticity of the muscles that flex and extend that joint.
One might also see some special signs associated with damage to upper motor
neurons. one such sign is called the Babinski's
sign. The Babinski's sign is evident with the
stroke of the sole of the foot, with a sharp object.
Now for adults with an intact cortical spinal system, such a stroke from the
heel of the foot, towards the ball of the foot.
Leads to flexion of the toes, or a downward turning of the, of the toes.
This is a normal plantar flexion response.
Someone with damaged upper motor neurons, might have a very different sign with
this heal to ball of the foot stoking with a sharp object.
We would see an upward turn of the great toe and a fanning out or an extension of
the remaining toes. So this is quite a different sign than
what we observe with an intact nervous system.
Now the problem with the Babinski's sign is that, is just not that good.
That is It has relatively low specificity and sensitivity.
So a patient of yours may have an upper motor neuron injury but may show a normal
plantar response. So just be cautious in how you interpret
a normal Babinski's reflex. If you see an abnormal Babinski reflex
then you can have more confidence that indeed there may be damage to an upper
motor neuronal system. I want you to appreciate how the
spasticity and the special science contrast with what we see with damage to
lower motor neuron injuries. So with lower motor neuron injury, we see
decreased reflexes. We see decreased muscle tone.
And over time, we'll see muscle atrophy. In the early stages of injury, we'll see
this abnormal activity of muscle fibers in motor units that we call
fasciculations and fibrillations. With upper motor neuron injuries, we tend
not to see such a loss of muscle structure and integrity.
so there may be some atrophy due to not much use of the affected body regions.
But the atrophy will not be nearly as severe as what is seen, over time, with
damage to lower motor neurons and the loss of innervation of that muscle
tissue. So, remember, with damage to upper motor
neurons the muscle is still innervated. The problem is that, the output of lower
motor neurons is no longer governed and regulated in a normal fashion.
And that's why we see the emergence of these special signs.
That's why we see the development of spasticity.
It seems as though the aggregate effect of the descending projections, especially
those that come from the reticulospinal connections is to suppress the gain and
the tone of our segmental reflexes. So once that overall suppressive
influence is lost with damage, let's say, to the spinal cord what we see below the
level of injury is the emergence of higher gain in those segmental reflexes.
And that's why there's increased muscle tone in hyperactive reflexes and perhaps
that's why clonus emerges with the rhythmical beating of the extensors and
flexor muscles. Now, one final point I would make here
about upper motor neuronal damage is that the kind of movement that is especially
affected is the fine volitional movement that expresses skill.
And I hope this makes sense to you, I think I've been trying to emphasize that
much of the motor cortex and the cortical spinal system is concerned with the
expression of skill with the distal extremities.
So, it would make some sense then if there is damage to the motor cortex that
the greatest loss would be in the expression of skill, with our hands, with
our feet, with our lower oral facial structures.
Now, if one had damage limited to the upper motor neuron systems of the brain
stem, then we might expect there to be problems with postural controls,
specifically. and if there were sparing of, lets say,
the pyramidal system, one might expect there to be residual activities that
could be performed with the distal extremities.
So one can have a neuro anatomical framework for interpreting specifically
the signs and symptoms of upper motor neuron injuries that are observed in any
given patient. Well, I'm going to conclude this extended
tutorial at this point about upper motor neurons.
The one topic that's relevant that we have not yet discussed in this tutorial
concerns the anatomy of the descending projections.
And its that topic that I'd like to turn to in our next tutorial we'll have a
chance to actually see the connections in cross sections of the brain stem.
And identify the location of our critical pathways for upper neural motor control
of lower motor activity. So, I'll see you then, and look forward
to having that anatomical discussion.