Welcome to this tutorial on Upper Motor
Neuronal Control. And what I really want to focus on in
this session is the anatomical organization of the corticospinal and
corticobulbar pathways. This topic relates to several of our core
concepts in the field of neuroscience. I hope this subject will allow you to
break down some of the complexity of the human brain.
Nevertheless, I'm sure you appreciate by now that the brain is indeed the body's
most complex organ. Now the pathways we're going to be
discussing today are genetically determined.
They provide a foundation for upper motor neuronal control of lower motor circuits.
So it's very important that we understand their organization and anatomical
distribution, but that's not to say that even these pathways can't be changed by
life experiences. Indeed the strength of the connections
between our upper motor neuronal pathways and lower motor circuits are subject to
experience-dependent modification. And we think that this might be an
important site of neuroplasticity, as we acquire new motor skills.
Indeed, many neural systems are changed with practice and with the acquisition of
skill, but let's not forget that even these pathways that we're going to be
talking about today may themselves be modified by experience.
So, I have several objectives for you in this session.
I want you to be able to characterize the organization of the corticospinal pathway
from the cortex to lower motor circuits in the spinal cord.
I want you to be able to do the same thing for the corticobulbar pathway.
Only as we'll come to define this pathway, this pathway terminates in the
brain stem, not in the spinal cord. I want you to be able to recognize
components of the corticospinal and corticobulbar pathways as we look at the
brain from the outside, but also as we look at the brain in cross sections.
Through the brainstem and the spinal cord and I even want you to be able to look
into sections through the hemispheres and know where elements of these pathways
will be located. Well one way to help you consolidate the
information that I hope for you to learn in this tutorial is to draw, to make a
sketch. that sketch could be on a white board, a
chalkboard, a piece of paper, it could be made with a stick in the dirt at your
feet, but what I would say about sketching is that the bigger the better.
So I want you to be able to sketch the corticospinal and corticobulbar pathways.
From cortex to lower motor circuits. And you might even want to include in
your sketches the lower motor neurons themselves and their connection to the
muscle fibers that they innervate. Okay, well let me give you a broad
overview of our pathways of upper motor neurons to lower motor neurons, and this
is a, a figure that you've already seen in conjunction with our studies of upper
motor neurons. And this pathway that you see here,
illustrates the way that circuits of upper motor neurons in the cortex and in
the brain stem connect with lower motor circuits in the spinal cord.
The main pathway that we're going to be concerned about today is the one that
relates upper motor neurons in the posterior part of the frontal lobe, that
is the motor cortex, to lower motor neurons that are found in the lateral
part of the ventral horn of the spinal cord.
Now there are other kinds of motor neurons that are involved in governing
the output and spinal cord. Namely three major sources of motor
neurons in the brain stem, probably most important would be the reticular
formation of the brain stem, it supplies projections that terminate bilaterally,
in the medial parts of the ventral horn of the spinal cord.
There's also descending projections from the vestibular nuclei of the brain stem,
also distributed to the medial parts of the ventral horn of the spinal cord.
An thirdly there are projections from the superior colliculus to the upper part of
the cervical cord. Although, in humans, we think that this
effect of the superior colliculus on the orientation movements of the head and
neck may actually be mediated by the reticular spinal connections.
Well, so this is the broad view of our perspective of the distribution of upper
motor neurons to lower motor neurons. And I think it's very helpful for you to
keep in mind this medial to lateral somatotopy that we find in the spinal
cord. So when we talk about our lateral
corticospinal fibers that are found here in the lateral white matter of the spinal
cord. I want you to relate function to this
anatomical location. And appreciate that these axons are
terminating among the lower motor neurons that are concerned with the skilled
movements of the distal extremities. Meanwhile those axons that we find in the
anterior and medial part of the spinal cord, are giving rise to projections that
typically terminate bilaterally on the medial part of the ventral horn.
So these would terminations on columns of cells that are concerned more with
posture. And with the gross movements of the limbs
via the actions of proximal limb muscles. So I want you to be able to associate
these two different anatomical locations with two kinds of functions.
The lateral column of the spinal cord is concerned with the expression of skill,
[SOUND] whereas these medial systems are more concerned with the maintenance and
adjustment of posture. Okay.
Well, let's talk now about our corticospinal and corticobulbar pathways.
And to begin, we need to consider once again the organization of the motor
cortex. So, recall that the motor cortex is found
in the posterior part of the frontal lobe, and we can divide it into a
posterior primary motor cortex that occupies the anterior bank of the central
sulcus and the precentral gyrus. And then just anterior to that primary
motor cortex we find the premotor cortex. Which begins at the interior part of the
precentral gyrus and continues on into the posterior part of those three long
parallel gyri that come to meet the precentral gyrus almost at a right angle.
The superior, the middle, and the inferior frontal gyri.
Okay, so that's what we have here. In our premotor cortex.
While both the primary motor cortex and the premotor cortex give rise to
descending projections that contribute to the corticospinal and corticobulbar
pathways. And to understand the difference one
needs to be reminded a bit of the somatotopy.
That we find in the precentral gyrus, and that extends into the premotor cortex as
well. Now, recall that the somatotopy in the
motor cortex is a gross reflection of the somatotopy that we find in the somatic
sensory cortex, across the central sulcus and the post central gyrus.
But the detail is quite different. Rather than there being a faithful
representation in a point-by-point fashion of the contralateral body
surface, what we see in the motor cortex is a map of movement intention.
And that intention is roughly somatotopically organized in the
following way. With movements that we intend to make
involving our lower extremity being represented here in the paracentral
lobule on the medial face of the hemisphere, and just out a bit into the
dorsal medial margin of the hemisphere. Well, as we progress in a lateral and
inferior direction, we move from the lower extremity up through the trunk and
into a large expansive region near the center of the motor cortex that is
concerned with the movements that we intend to make with our arms and our
hands. So there's a large upper extremity
representation near the middle of the precentral gyrus and extending into
premotor cortex. While just inferior to that
representation of that upper extremity, in this lower third, approximately, of
the motor cortex. We find a large representation of the
contralateral face and specifically the lower part of the face.
Now, I want you to learn more about the way the upper motor neurons of the cortex
control the movements of the face in a separate tutorial that I've prepared
called, Upper Motor Neuronal Control of Facial Expressions.
So, I will refer you there for more detail about how the face is governed by,
not only this lateral inferior precentral gyrus, but also a fairly newly discovered
region, right about here, in the banks of the cingulate sulcus that we call the
cingulate motor area. And it will be important for you to
understand how these two parts of our motor cortex relate to the divisions of
the facial motor nucleus that govern the upper and lower parts of the face.
So, please see this other tutorial for a fuller expla, explanation of this aspect
of the connection between the motor cortex and the facial motor nuclei.
Well, for the rest of our time, I'd like for us to focus then on the organization
of these descending pathways, principally the corticospinal pathway.
I'll say a little bit about the corticobulbar pathway, but I'll refer you
mainly to this additional tutorial for some deeper explanation of the
connections between cortex and those relevant cranial nerve motor nuclei.
All right, so let's use this figure from our text book, which I suspect is really
quite small on the screen that you're viewing this on, but I'll try to use it
nevertheless, and refer you to the additional figure that we have in the
tutorial notes. And then I want us to jump into Sylvius
and really find the elements of this pathway and cross-section as they are
displayed for you in the tutorial notes. Well, let's focus on the pathway shown in
red. This is the cortical spinal pathway.
So, what we're illustrating, for example, will be the descending projections.
Of a motor cortex neuron that might be found near the middle of the precentral
gyrus. So we imagine this as a neuron that's
concerned with the movements of the contralateral arm and hand.
So this neuron grows an axon that runs through the white matter of the
hemisphere and it enters the posterior limb of the internal capsule.
This is the means that allows this axon to pass through the hemisphere between
the basal ganglia and thalamus, and then eventually down into the brain stem.
And these axons are component of this massive stalk of white matter that we
find on the ventrolateral surface of the midbrain.
Called the cerebral peduncle. So these axons pass through the cerebral
peduncle, and then they enter the pons. Now, along the way these axons might
sprout collaterals that supply additional structures that they may pass.
for example, there may be a branch that supplies the red nucleus, which is a
large nucleus of the midbrain. There may be axons that terminate among
the pontine nuclei here at the base of the pons.
There may be axons that pass through the core of the brain stem and terminate in
the reticular formation. Which is going to receive information
from the motor cortex about the intention of movement.
Well, in order to actually express the movement these neurons have to make their
way through the brain stem and into the spinal cord.
And here's what happens as these axon pass through the medulla and enter the
caudal part of the medulla, where the spinal cord medullary junction is found.
The vast majority of these axons will cross the midline in a structure that we
call the pyramidal decussation. We can think of this maybe as, as a
folding of the arms, where one medullary pyramid crosses over the other.
And consequently, the bulk of the axons that were present in one medullary
pyramid are now found in the opposite side of the white matter of the spinal
cord. It's at that point that we call this the
lateral corticospinal track. So, roughly 90 to 95% of the axons.
That are present in one medullary pyramid will cross the midline and end up in the
lateral column of white matter of the spinal cord on the opposite side of the
midline. The remaining 5 to 10% of the axons or
so, remain on the same side of the spinal cord.
And they are present in this anterior and medial white matter.
From there they tend to branch and give rise to bilateral connections, to that
medial part of the ventral horn that controls the more proximal muscles of the
limbs. So this is a picture of our descending
corticospinal pathway. And I hope you're not too distracted by
these collaterals, to structures in the brain stem, this will serve the purpose
of informing important circuits in the brain stem about the intention of
movement. Okay, now let's turn our attention to the
corticobulbar pathway, which is shown here in this yellow colored axon.
Now notice where this axon begins. It grows out of a neuron in the inferior
and lateral part of the precentral gyrus. That's where we would expect
representation of the facial region. In our motor cortex.
So this axon, then, runs through the white matter of the hemisphere, just as
we saw for the corticospinal track axon, through the posterior limb of the
internal capsule, into the brain stem, where it runs through the cerebral
peduncle. And perhaps along the way, it too might
give rise to branches that terminate in structures like the red nucleus.
Now, as this axon passes into the brain stem, it will be directing its
projections, its terminal fields, primarily towards one or another.
Of the cranial nerve motor nuclei. Now in this illustration I think just for
artistic simplicity the branches are shown only to ipsilateral structures.
But as is detailed, both in the tutorial notes and in the separate video tutorial
that I have for you. On the control of the facial muscles, we
know that these collaterals are actually bilaterally distributed.
And for some structures, including the trigeminal motor nucleus, there may
actually be a contralateral bias in that distribution.
We know that's certainly true for the lower motor neurons that are governing
the lower part of the face. That is, the lower motor neurons in the
facial motor nucleus. But for the most part, we can think of
these corticobulbar pathways as bilateral.
The only issue is the degree of contralateral bias.
Okay, well, these axons are distributed only into the brain stem, they're
corticobulbar. This term bulbar refers to the brain
stem, and many authors choose to restrict it even further to projections from
cortex to the motor nuclei of the cranial nerves.
Not just all brain stem projections, but specifically those brain stem targets.
I think we can compromise somewhat and consider the corticobulbar pathway to be
the means by which the motor cortex motivates the output of our cranial nerve
motor nuclei. Well, just one additional quantitative
point that, that might give you some perspective on the projections from the
cortex to the brain stem. the dominant projection, really, from the
cerebral cortex to the brain stem, really is not corticobulbar in the sense that
I'm using this term here in this tutorial.
There are actually corticopontine fibers. So these are the projections that arise
from all over the cerebral cortex of one hemisphere and terminate among the
pontine nuclei that are present in the base of the pons.
These cells, in turn, project across the midline into the cerebellar hemisphere,
which is sitting out here somewhere. So if you review your understanding of
the cerebellum and the cerebral pathways, you'll recall this connection from cortex
to base of the pons, and then from base of the pons to the contralateral
cerebellum. This quantitatively is actually the
largest component of axons in the cerebral peduncle, the minor
contributions are actually the corticospinal and the corticobulbar
pathway. Okay, well let's return then to our focus
on the anatomy of this corticospinal and corticobulbar pathway.
And I'd like for us to look at some cross sections in Sylvius, and identify the
locations of where we would find these axons if we were to look through
histological sections of the brain stem and spinal cord.