Hopefully you were able to come up with
what I was looking for in that study question.
if not, you'll see it appear shortly as we progress in this tutorial.
Alright, well let's consider now, what are some of those molecular signals that
guide the growth of the axon? that, that influence the decisions made
by that growth cone as it explores the environment through which that elongating
axon is traversing. Well we consider, basically, two classes
of molecules. There are molecules that are associated
with membranes of cells of the developing embryo.
And these molecules may also be embedded in the matrix that lies between the
cells. We call that the extracellular matrix.
So these are our bound molecules, cell-associated molecules or
extracellular matrix-associated molecules.
That's one category. Another category, are diffusible
molecules, so as that implies these are not cell associated, they are not bound
to a membrane or to the matrix, but rather they are freely defusing in the
extra cellular spaces of the developing nervous system or the developing embryo.
So let's look at, specifically what we have in mind here.
So, again these cell associated molecules are on the surface of cells or they're
embedded in the extra cellular matrix. And they mediate molecular interactions
between the developing growth cone and the parenchyma.
That is whatever the sub stratum is that that growth cone is exploring.
Now the interactions between the growth cone and the surfaces can trigger second
messenger systems within the growth cones that transduce extra-cellular signals
into patterns of directed growth. Some of these cell associated molecules
play a role in stabilizing the linkages between axonal membranes And the
structures that surround them. One important element will be the glial
cells that begin to form myelin or begin to lay down a sub-stratum, over which
that axon will be laid down. So, there needs to be not just direction
of growth but also stabilization of the axon That is elongated in the wake of
that growth cone. Now, the diffusible molecules, as I
mentioned, they are secreted by target structures, and diffused into the
extracellular spaces. So, then by definition, the diffusible
molecules can act over a much greater distance, within the central nervous
system, or outside the CNS in the embryo, then can the cell-associated molecules
that are anchored to a membrane, or the extra-cellular matrix.
Okay, what I'd like to do next is to consider some specific examples of our
cell-associated molecules to give you a feel for what kinds of actions they may
mediate. So here's a figure from your text that
just illustrates some of the important cell-associated molecules that we know
about beginning with those that are associated with the extracellular matrix.
So here is a representation of that matrix, and the idea is that there are
proteins. And other kinds of molecules that present
sort of a fibrous matrix in the extra-cellular spaces.
And molecules can interact then with receptors, which are often the very same
molecule. We call this a homophillic interaction
because its the same molecule interacting with itself, in this case what we see is
interactions among the integrin receptors.
Now these integrin themselves are not, do not have enzymatic activity in the
cytoplasmic surface of the molecule, but rather they interact.
With other kinds of molecules. that do have that sentimatic activity.
for example connaises and other kinds of signaling molecules that can activate
other second messenger systems for further signal transduction downstream.
Well those are the integrents there's a variety of individual members of that
family. Next I'd like to mention the cell
adhesion molecules. These are very important for mediating
several different specific aspects of pathway development.
We'll talk about some as we move along here.
There are certain classes of cell adhesion molecules that don't require the
activity or the presence of calcium. And so that's what's shown here on panel
B. So, these cell adhesion molecules, or
CAMs for short that are depicted here would be the L one cam, as well as the
neuronal cell adhesion molecule called NCAM.
So, these do interact with similar kinds of Kinases and other effector systems
within the cell that can influence transduction cascades within the cell
that's interacting with these molecules. Now notice again there's homophilic
interaction of one kind of cell adhesion molecule with the very same type of
molecule on the surface of another cell. Now, there are cell adhesion molecules
that are calcium dependent. They require calcium for their activity.
Here's an example of one. It's called a Cadhedrin.
So here, we have Cadhedrins that require the binding of calcium ions in order to
engage their activity. And these activities the are mediated via
a variety of second messenger systems, some of which can have positive effects,
some can have negative effects depending upon the system in question.
this particular cadhedrin interacts with the beta catenin pathway, which can have
an impact on the assembly of actin filaments in the cell that is receiving
this signal. And then lastly I would mention the
ephrins. So the ephrins are very important class
of molecules. the, the ephrin proteins are presented on
the surface of cells, and they interact with receptors.
That we call ephs, or ephrin receptors. These are tyresine kinase receptors, and
they can activate a variety of different kinds of second messenger systems within
cells. Here we see an ephrin receptor
interacting with the row GAP system that likewise can have an impact on the
assembly or dis-assembly of actin filaments.
Now I'll you one example of the importance effrans and effran receptors
in the development of circuitry. Lets consider for example the development
of a topographical map. This requires axons from kind of
structure in the developing nervous system to project into a target
structure, and to do so in an orderly way.
We saw many examples of this as we talked through unit 3 and considered our sensory
systems. And perhaps we took it for granted that
it is possible to establish such topographic maps connecting one station
in neural pathway with another. but it's really quite an amazing
accomplishment in neural development, and for a long time neuroscientists suspected
that there may be chemical molecules that somehow are establishing the basic
framework for a map. And then, in subsequent stages of
development, perhaps neural activity can be used to refine those connections.
And in deed that seems to be the basic para dine by which topographic maps were
established. We now know that ephrins and ephrin
receptors play an important role in establishing topography in such systems.
Here's an example that demonstrated rather dramatically The nature of the
recognition between one supply structure and its target in the brain.
And here what I'd like to present is a bit of a scenario derived from studies of
an amphibian system, the frog visual pathway which connects the retina to the
frog's version of the superior colliculus that we call the optic tectum.
And what's known about the anatomy of this system is that the posterior, or the
temporal part of the retina, from the frog eye Tends to send its axons into the
anterior region of the tectum, preferentially avoiding the posterior
region. Meanwhile, the more anterior or nasal
part of the frog's retina sends its axons past the anterior part of the tectum.
To arborize mainly in the posterior part. Well, one fairly dramatic demonstration
that there must be some kind of recognition that allows temporal retina
to affiliate with the anterior part of the tectum, and nasal retina to affiliate
with posterior part came from experiments that involve rotating the eye of a frog.
Now unlike mamals and amphibians, if you destroy the optic nerve it will actually
regrow into the brain and what was done in this experiment is that the eye was
surgically rotated and then reattached. And after some time, the axons that were
cut in the optic nerve were able to regenerate and reinnervate the brain.
And so, the behavior of the frog was then observed, and what was very clear was
that after rotating the eye of the frog, its behavior was off by precisely 180
degrees, which was the extent of the rotation.
So a visual motor target appears, to the upper left, and the frog protrudes its
tongue to the lower right. not good for the frog, maybe good for the
fly. It indicates the identity of the retinal
ganglion cells continued to be recognized by the appropriate domain of the optic
tectum. Irrespective of the surgical rotation of
the eye. So what this experiment illustrated is
that the anatomical structures of the eye remapped to the same divisions of the
optic tectum. irrespective of the rotation of the eye.
So in this case we imagine that the fly is out in the temporal part of the visual
field, which ought to be seen with a normal eye by the nasal part of the
retina. The problem is that the eye has been
rotated. So now what should be the temporal part
of the visual field is being seen by the temporal part of the retina.
Following rotation, well that part of the retina is going to innervate and project
into this anterior part of the tectum which is going to be responsible for
inducing this reflexive motor action down into the right.
Which is now exactly 180 degrees off of where the appropriate strike should have
been to acquire the target. So this experiment shows us that this
mapping seems to be of a chemical nature, rather than a functional nature, fully
tuned and fully accomodated to the behavior of the animal.
So, many years had passed. decades, as a matter of fact, of, that
established this topographic map were worked out.
So we know that in this system what mediates the topography of this
connection between the retina and the tectum, are ephrins and their receptors.
So rather than there being a precise lock and key mechanism on a point by point
basis, what we see is the establishment of gradience.
Gradience of the ligand and gradience of the receptors.
And the matching of ligand concentration to available receptor is what establishes
the continuity. And the topographic mapping.
Such that the most posterior temporal portion of the retina is mapped to the
most anterior portion of the tectum. And then a gradient is established for
the rest of the posterior temporal retina.
And that gradient then is what allows for the exclusion of axons, that then come to
be mapped into the posterior part of the tectum.
Those axons being derived from the nasal part of the retina.
So efferent signal is critical we think for the establishment to typographic maps
not just in the optic tectum of the frog, but we think, where ever we find
topographic maps in the developing central nervous system, including ours.