Welcome to this tutorial on the
Propagation of Action Potentials. This is the final tutorial in a set in
which we've been considering the ionic basis of the resting membrane potential,
the action potential. The molecular mechanisms involved in the
generation of action potentials. And now, we're going to talk about how
these signals propagate along the length of an axon.
So welcome to my home. It's a chilly, rainy evening.
I suspect you can probably hear the rain falling in the background.
So please don't mind that. It may sound a bit staticky but it's
really a lovely sound from where I'm sitting.
And I hope you can enjoy that with me this evening.
Well, let's begin. Once again, our story today on the
propagation of the action potential. Pertains to, our second of our eight core
concepts in the field of neuroscience. That is, that neurons communicate using
both electrical and chemical signals. Our learning objectives for today are that
I want you to be able to describe the ionic basis of the action potential.
In terms of the voltage in time -dependant changes in ionic permeabilities that occur
across the neuronal plasma membrane. Same learning objective you saw with our
last tutorial. But now what I want you to do is to apply
that knowledge to the concept of propegation of action potentials along a
lenth of axon. And that brings us to our second
objective, and that is to consider the benefits of adding myelin to an axonal
sheath. So I want you to be able to characterize
the advantages of myelin for the conduction of a l-, action potential along
an axon. Well, in order to set the stage for what I
want to discuss with you today. I'm going to recommend that you pause for
just a moment and view animation 2.3 at the website that supports our textbook.
This animation will account for you again the ionic basis of the action potential.
You can click on the hyperlink that's part of your tutorial notes.
Or navigate yourself to the website that supports our text.
Okay well, I think we're ready to move on. And let's consider for a starters some of
the properties again of an axon. And some of the limitations that need to
be overcome as we consider what it takes to propagate an action potential.
Now, you'll recall a point I made right at the start of the course, and that is that;
neuronal membranes apparently poor conductors of electricity.
One reason for that, of course, is that these membranes tend to be somewhat leaky.
They just don't allow for the conduction of electrical charge very efficiently.
And this phenomenon is illustrated with. The application of a relatively weak
electrical signals to a length of an axon. So we might call this a sub-threshold
stimulus one that is not going to depolarize neuron sufficiently to reach
threshold for falling an actual potential. So threshold in this particular axons is
around minus 50 millivolts. And even right near our stimulating
electrode, we record a depolarization of only about seven or eight millivolts.
So, not sufficient to bring this neuron from minus 65 to minus 50.
But that's okay. This experiment illustrates the point that
all we have to do is travel a relatively short length down this axon.
Just a few millimeters, and already there's significant decay of the current
that's been passed at a particular site. So without the presence of myelin, an axon
by itself is just not going to provide, sufficienct conduction through purely
passive means. Now, when we talk about the passive flow
of current along an axon, this is essentially what we're talking about.
With the sub-threshold depolarization, all we have is passive current flow down this
axon. And due to the leakiness of the membrane,
especially in the absence of myelin, there's just not much hope of conducting
the electrical signal more than a millimeter or so.
But thankfully, there are indeed active properties that can facilitate the
propagation of an action potential. So now, let's look at a length of axon
that is stimulated with a stronger stimulus.
Such that the local region of the membrane is depolarized sufficiently to achieve
threshold for firing a action potential. And then let's watch what happens.
Okay. This is a bit of a busy figure from your
textbook, figure 3.10. But I think it illustrates quite nicely
the basic phenomenon that we want to consider.
Let me just set up this figure for you, just a little bit.
So we have three moments in time. That are illustrated.
Time 1, time 2, and time 3. And then we have three locations along the
axon that are illustrated. Point a, point b, and point c.
So let's begin at time equals 1 and point a.
And so this, in fact, will be the site at which we stimulate this axon by injecting
positive current at this local site. Now, if we inject sufficient current to
depolarize this membrane beyond threshold. What we will have is an action potential.
Okay? And that action potential, as you now
know, involves the voltage dependent opening of sodium and potassium channels.
First sodium, very quickly, and that allows for sodium to rush in through these
open sodium channels. And that sodium now triggers the passive
movement of charge along the length of this axon.
So that charge is going to go in both directions, away from this side of
stimulation. Now let's see what's happening as we move
from point A to point B. Positive charge is flowing as indicated by
the red shading in the middle of the axon. And as we reach point B, now, if there is
sufficient depolarization of this membrane, the next batch of sodium
channels are going to open up, sodiums going to rush in.
And the wave of depolarization is going to continue in this direction from point A to
point B, and now from point B to point C. But let's return upstream to point A where
we initially stimulated to consider what's happening.
Recall that the opening of potassium channel lags behind the opening of sodium
channels. So this means that while an action
potential has been triggered and depolarization has reached point B, at
point A now. What we have is the opening of potassium
channels and the efflux of potassium ions. This means that The initial site of
stimulation is now engaged in the process of repolarization.
This, in essence, puts a brake on the back propagation of the action potential.
Allowing the signal to propagate. Primarily in the downstream direction from
the site of stimulation to outward. Okay.
So, now let's arrive at point C and as with point B, the depolarization.
Is sufficient to open enough voltage-gated sodium channels that the inward sodium
current is greater than any lake of potassium current and any voltage
dependent efflux of potassium. That means that sodium is going to rush
in, that positive cycle is going to be regenerated and The action potential will
continue to propagate. Now, if one is to put a recording
electrode at each of these points. What we'd see is that, at time 1, at point
A, we have an action potential. At point B, a little later in time, we
have an action potential recorded. And further along the axon at point C, and
a little later in time, we can likewise record another action potential.
Now while point C is firing its action potential, again the process of
re-polarization is taking place upstream at point B.
So potassium ions are leaving. As the potassium channels open more
slowly, and that again puts a bit of a blockade on the backwards propagation of
that action potential. So this slower negative feedback loop in
essence helps to push the action potential Down in a direction that, for most axons,
would be physiological. Now, let me make a point about
nomenclature. We talk about the propagation of an action
potential. Or the conduction of the action potential,
as if something's actually moving. Well, what's moving as charge within the
cytoplasm of the axon. But really, what I think you can
appreciate is that the action potential is being regenerated at each of these points
A, B, and C. One additional point to make before we
leave figure 3.10. And that is the importance of passive
current flow. The passive current flow that I've been
speaking about refers to this movement of charge down the axis cylinder of the axon.
And, as you know from your studies of the movement of fluids through tubes from
physics That the greater resistance. Then, the less flow there's going to be,
down that cylinder. The same is true for the movement of
charge. So, small diameter axons impose greater
resistance to the axial diffusion of ions. Or the axial conduction of charge.
Larger diameter axons are for less resistance and facilitate the rapid
conduction of passive current. This is why small diameter axons will have
a slower propagation rate of action potential conduction.
Compared to larger diameter axons. So one way to speed up action potential
propogation is to incrase the diameter of an axon and vice versa.
Okay, now what about myelin. How does myelin contribute to the
propogation of action potentials. Well, I would remind you that myelin is
produced in the central nervous system by oligodendrocytes.
In peripheral nerves in the body, myelin is made by Schwann cells.
But we're focused mainly on the central nervous system in this course so I'll use
as our example for myelin forming cell the oligodendrocyte.
So, you'll remember that the oligodendrocyte grows out a plasmalemma or
a layer of membrane, that then wraps around a segment of axon.
The length of that segment is typically about a millimeter, sometimes, More,
sometimes less, but typically a millimeter.
And at the junction of a myelin sheath that's formed by one cell and different
cell, is a gap. And that gap is known as a Node of
Ranvier. And at this gap we have a concentration of
Ion channels. Channels for sodium and channels for
potassium, allowing for the regeneration of action potentials at the Nodes of
Ranvier. In between the Nodes of Ranvier, we have a
tight wrapping of myelin. Which serves to increase the passive
current flow by making the myelinated segment of axon much less leaky than it
would be otherwise. So more charge is effectively transferred
from one node to the next. There's another advantage here to the
presence of myelin. And that is that this Node of Ranvier
presents a limited space for the concentration of ion channels.
Without myelin to ensure effective propagation of axon potentials, one might
imagine a much larger number of ion channels would need to be inserted into
the membrane in order to ensure propagation.
But with myelin, a smaller number of ion channels can be concentrated in, much
less, surface area along the axonal plasma membrane.
So this leads to greater efficiencies as well as greater, speed of conduction.
So let's look at how this works. Consider a similar kind of an experiment.
Looking at a length of axon at three points in space along the length, but also
at three moments in time. And consider what happens when a stimulus
is applied, let's say to point A. So when this happens, as we saw
previously, voltage-dependent sodium channels open, sodium rushes in.
And positive charge can now very effectively and very rapidly passively
diffuse down along the length of myelinated axon.
Until the next Node of Ranvier is reached. We'll call that point B.
Here, sodium channels are opened. More sodium can rush in as the action
potential is regenerated here. The net positive charge, now again,
effectively, passively Defuses down that axon and reaches our third point, point c,
again regenerating action potential as sodium ions rush in.
Meanwhile upstream at each of these sites, there is the delayed opening of potassium
channels. So, potassium flows out.
The membrane repolarizes again putting the brakes on the back propagation of that
action potential. The same would be true, of course, with
the repolarization of the membrane. At site B.
As an action potential is generated one nodal length.
In the downstream direction at point C. So, the advantages of myelin is really
twofold. One is an increase in the propagation of
action potentials in terms of both efficiency and in terms of the conduction
velocity. But also there is an advantage of economy.
Fewer ion channels need to be produced by the cell body and inserted into a much
more reduced surface area of axonal plasma membrane.
Now, let's compare the generation and propagation of action potentials in an
unmyelinated axon that might be sitting in a spinal nerve right next to a myelinated
axon. The unmyelinated axon might be a post
ganglionic axon derived from an autonomic nervous system neuron.
The myelinated axon could be a sensory or motor fiber present in peripheral nerve.
And if we stimulate, nearby locations along that nerve.
We might drive sodium into both of these axons and trigger an action potential at
the same time in the same place. But because of the presence of myelin, the
propagation of positive charge is going to be Much more rapid and much more efficient
in the myelinated axon compared to the unmyelinated axon.
And so we are able to generate the second action potential efficiently at the next
node in just a fraction of a second. Meanwhile, in the unmyelinated axon.
In order for there to be effective conduction of action potentials.
We need to put very many voltage dependent sodium and potassium channels along the
length of this membrane, to ensure the regeneration of action potential at each
adjacent point along its length. Now, as we continue to move down that
axon, we see that at least in this illustration, we've about doubled the
relative conduction velocity of the mylenated axon compared to the unmylenated
axon. Again, with the additional advantage, a
fewer ion channels are needed, only at the nodes to regenerate the action potential.
Compared to what must be necessary in this un-myelinated axon where the action
potential must be regenerated at each adjacent location in the membrane.
Now there's a term for the type of conduction that we see in the myelinated
axon. It's called saltatory conduction.
Which means, to jump. So, the implication is that the action
potential jumps from one node to the next, along the length of this myelinated axon.
And it's because the action potential need not be regenerated along each adjacent
segment of membrane. Because of the efficiency of the passive
flow of current along the length of the myelenated segment.
Action potentials only need to be regenerated at each node.
So there's this jumping of signal from one node to the next to the next to the next
along a myelinated axon. So, I'd like to leave you with a study
question that will challenge you to consider how these concepts might play out
in a clinical condition. That might affect the integrity of myelin
sheaths around axons. One of the, more common conditions that
can produce this result is multiple sclerosis.
So consider the study question that you can find here, as well as at the bottom of
your tutorial notes, and respond accordingly.
Lastly, I would encourage you to view animation 3.2.
You can do that by clicking on the hyperlink in your tutorial notes document
or follow the your browser's navigator to the website that supports our textbook.
And view animation 3.2, Impulse Conduction in Axons.
And hopefully that'll give you yet a different take on this important concept
of the propagation of electrical signals along the length of an axon.