Well, there's a lot of interesting
discussion these days, in the field of the neuroscience of pain, especially as it
relates to various psychological phenomena that had been well studied in another
context, such as the placebo effect or expectancy effects.
It very well may be that these Affects are mediated via projections that modulate how
this periaqueductal gray. Then mobilizes the resources of the brain
stem. To modulate the transmission of no
susceptive signals in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
So, stay tuned. I'm sure we will learn much more about
these mechanisms in the years to come. And now, let's turn our attention to
feedforward modulation of nociception. And this gets us into a really fascinating
discussion of an idea that's more than 50 years old now, and it's called the gate
theory of pain. And the idea essentially is this.
That somewhere in the central nervous system, there is competition between the
signals that are being driven from our mechanoreceptor afference and those that
are driven from our no susceptive afference.
And this competition, potentially, can allow for a mechanoreceptor to close the
gate on the transmission of pain signals. Well, here's one circuit that was proposed
by Melzack and Wall about 60 years ago. That attempts to provide a way of
understanding why we do something as simple squeeze a finger after we've hit it
with a hammer. Well, The idea is that in addition to the
usual projection to the dorsal columns that our mechanal receptor apharent might
provide, perhaps there's a collateral that synapses on one of these small
inter-neurons in the substantal gelatenosa That potentially can inhibit the
transmission of pain information from let's say an A delta afferent synapsing
upon a dorsal horn projection neuron. Well, if we imagint that this A beta fiber
conveying the[UNKNOWN] sensation. Fires action potentials that converge upon
such an interneuron. Then perhaps the effect is to suppress the
firing of our C fiber afarrent on the dorsal horn neuron.
And this conceptually would be a paradigm for closing the gate on pain transmission.
So getting back to hitting your thumb with a hammer, our first impulse often is to
squeeze that thumb that's just been struck.
Well, I think what our impulse is driving us to do is activate mechanoreceptors, and
that competition between nociceptors and mechanoceptors might be playing out in the
circuitory of the dorsal horn of the cervical spinal cord as we squeeze our
thumb, such that what we actually experience then has more to do with the
sensations that are driven by the mechanoreceptors than those that are
driven by the nociceptors. Well, this is a rather vague concept that
I think still remains to be well established in the neuroanatomy in the
neurophysiology of the circuits of the dorsal horn, but the idea itself has been
very powerful and it's led to a number of new interventions that are aimed at
closing the gate to paint transmission, perhaps at other levels for example, one
surgical intervention now to address some forms of pain would be to stimulate with a
micro-electrode the dorsal columns of the spinal cord.
So, the idea would be that perhaps there is another gate, or maybe a series of
gates. At higher levels of processing along our
symatic sensory pathways. Perhaps in the thalamus, or perhaps in the
cortex itself. And by activating mechanosensory fibers,
perhaps the gate to the transmission of painful information can be shut.
Well let's move on now and talk about a few remaining topics before we rack, wrap
up and, and let's just spend a few minutes thinking together about chronic pain.
Well chronic pain is a huge problem in societies around the world.
It's the source of untold disability, and suffering from people from all walks of
life. And chronic pain can usually be
conceptualized, as either being related to some no-susceptive source or not all.
So there is a nociceptive chronic pain that results from ongoing stimulation of
nocicepters. You might imagine there is some ongoing
sites of inflammation or injury to peripheral structures that continues to
drive [unknown] activity in our nociceptors.
Such forms of chronic pain would stimulate both our a delta and our c fibers and so
one would expect both first and second pain sorts of signels.
There's also a chronic pain syndrome that has largely remained somewhat of a
amysterty to meducal neuroscience. Typically this is a syndrome of chronic
pain when there is no known nociceptive idiology.
Examples might include some individuals who suffer with chronic lower back pain
perhaps fibromyalgia. That doesn't mean that there is not
nociceptive source, it's just that to date none has been discovered when we apply
this label of chronic pain syndrome. The actual etiology therefore remains
poorly understood but in most cases we consider it to be not a matter of a
psychogenic etiology. But rather just, an ideology that remains
poorly understood in terms of the fundamental neuroscience that underlies
the source of these signals that are interpreted as pain.
There have been a variety of recent proposals about, where these chronic pain
states might come from. One idea that is under investigation is
that perhaps there's some dysregulation of those feedback descending systems that run
through structures like the periaqueductal gray and ultimately through the brain stem
and into the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
Some disregulation of the brain's intrinsic means of dampening down
nociception, potentially could lead to sustaining a chronic pain state.
But undoubtedly there's more to it than that and probably a lot more interesting
neuroscience involved. Which leads us to our final topic, and
that would be neuropathic pain. So neuropathic pain refers to pain that
arises because there's abnormal activity in a nociceptive pathway that's unrelated
to the presence of a nociceptive stimulus out in the peripheral structures of the
body. Well, one can imagine at least two kinds
of sources of this kind of abnormal activity.
One could be if there's direct compression on a nerve and that compression can cause
there to be a physical opening of ion channels in the membranes in that region
of the compression. Should that be the case, one can imagine
the development of an ectopic focus for the generation of action potentials that
then propagate centrally and ultimately, the central nervous system interprets that
as pain. So nerve compression can be a common
peripheral cause of neuropathic pain. Now, if that's the case, one might expect
there to be other accompanying sensations, and often that is the case.
There are paresthesias, which is a term that's used to describe just unusual
somatic sensory sensations. That don't commonly map on to the usual
experience of encountering a mechanical stimulus.
Well this is one common scenario where neuropathic pain can be trouble.
But neuropathic pain can also arise through central mechanisms.
So among the central causes of neuropathic pain Would be the sustained sensitization
of neurons in a nociceptive pathway. We've already talked some about this
phenomenon of windup. One can imagine if neurons in the dorsal
horn of the spinal cord, for example, stayed in that state for an extended
period of time then that might lead to the development of a chronic pain condition.
Another idea about neuropathic pain is that perhaps it's a reflection of abnormal
autonomic nervous system output, to visceral structures, including perhaps
even the vasculature. So one idea is that maybe the sympathetic
outflow to the viscera Is disregulated in some way.
And then visceral sensory inputs back into the nervous system are what's driving this
interpretation of pain. But I think perhaps the most interesting
idea that's emerged in recent years is the notion that neuropathic pain may arise
because of plasticity. That's become maladaptive for human
behavior. And this maladaptive plasticity might be
sustaining the chronic pain state. 1 prime example of such phenomena, might
be those that are affiliated with phantom limbs.
So, phantom limb sensations are those that are generated following a nerve injury or
limb loss either through trauma or through surgical intervention.
And, here before us are illustrations of what some patients have reported to be the
sensations associated with body parts that are no longer present.
And you can see that these sensations take a variety of forms.
Sometimes there's nearly a complete sensation of the missing limb.
Sometimes it's only a partial sensation of that missing limb.
Sometimes there's this phenomenon of telescoping, such as what we find here.
Where the more distal part of the missing limb feels like its more proximal than it
actually would be or the limb intact. Well these sensations I think really
capture what I started off telling you about.
And this is that pain is a tremendously complex phenomenon.
It involves more than just new susception. But perhaps even more signifigantly, it
involves how those no susceptive signals become integrated into our conscious
awareness. And that phenomenon is 1 that, I think,
will continue to be a problem, in health care.
But also. I think neuroscience offers wonderful
opportunity to approach this problem through new multi disciplinary means.
One might imagine for example, if the problem of pain really is one of in the
forebrain. Then there may be different ways to
intervene. That don't necessarily work through the
peripheral channel that might have triggered the pain in the first place.
Perhaps this is why social structures, physical exercise often can be such a
benefit to people that are experiencing pain states.
Well, there's much more research that needs to be done in this fascinating field
of, of pain and pain-management. And I hope that you all might have an
opportunity to contribute to the advancement of this field and the
alleviation of human suffering. But in the meantime, let's apply ourselves
well. To the studies of the mechanisms of
nociception and to the organization of the central pathways that convey nociceptive
signals into the nervous system and on up to the levels of the cerebral cortex.
So, if you've not yet looked at the tutorial on the pain pathways, you might
want to go ahead and queue that up next. So, I'll see you there, when we.
Briefly review the pathways for pain transmission in the central nervous
system.