Welcome back to
Cybersecurity for Everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. We have finished talking about the overall effects
that a threat actor can have on a particular
target organization that can lead to primary, secondary, and even
second-order effects. Which leads us to this question of a strategic approach
to cybersecurity. When does a cyber event become not just a
private problem, but a public concern? Cybersecurity can be seen
as a strategic concern. Specifically, the
National Cyber Strategy authored in 2018 highlights that the administration will develop a comprehensive
understanding of national risks by identifying national
critical functions, and will mature
cybersecurity offerings and engagements to better manage
those national risks. They're attempting
to identify what is a strategic problem
and what is not. National risk is really
answering a specific question. What cyber events constitute a private problem versus
a public concern. This course has exposed you to several topics that help
you answer that question. For example, how did the history of the Internet
open up security challenges? How does the global
telecommunications infrastructure work? Who are the threat actors
and what are their motives? What is hacking? Finally, what are
the range of effects that those threat
actors can achieve? If you recall, hacking generates initial primary
effects which can lead to those additional
consequences. Threat actors utilize
the Internet and the global telecommunications
infrastructure to engage in a series
of hacking events. Those events lead to
actions on target. Those actions on target
generate a cyber event. Cyber events can have
primary effects, secondary effects, and even
second-order consequences. That include physical effects, macroeconomic effects,
and even informational. What national risk we accept is really a
concern for everyone? Cybersecurity is
about that interplay between technical
and human systems. How technology is leveraged
by organizations or even countries opens up the
potential for strategic harm. Understanding the
techniques and effects of threat actors allows us to
prioritize our defense. Good prioritization is
the efficient means for addressing this problem. What are some of the
takeaways that I hope that you've gotten
out of this course? First, that the evolution
of the Internet has greatly enhanced our
dependence on technology. Think about how you use
technology in your own life, and think about how
maybe that was the case, or not the case 30 years ago. The global telecommunications
infrastructure is both complex and vulnerable
to a range of threats. Threat actors leverage their
skill and resources to attack organizations through their underlying technical
and human systems. The process of hacking is a deliberate and
calculated approach to achieving the
threat actor's goals. Finally, the range
of effects that can occur in a cyber event help determine if this is in fact a private problem or
a public concern. I hope that you've gotten
a lot out of this course. You really start to think about this complex interplay between human and technical systems. Until next time. This is
Charles Harry. Goodbye.