[MUSIC] Hi, welcome back to cybersecurity for
everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last episode, we talked
about how to scale the internet and how the government tried to use incentive
structures to get the private sector more involved in building out the technology. In this episode, I want to talk about the next internet
based boom building the World Wide Web, and this is often times the way that
most of us interact with the Internet. So by the late 1980s, the internet really had
become standardized. We had standardized the specific set
of instructions that were required for internetworking. Right? This concept that was initially pioneered
in the late fifties and sixties, and this is a reflection of
the collective work between academia, the government, and the private sector. And so by 1992,
the Internet really is a global standard linking millions of
devices around the world. But it's not quite the way that
we think of the internet today. It was a set of networks connected, but
the way in which individuals leverage those networks was really quite
different than what we find today. So the question is how do
ordinary people use the internet? It's one thing if you're a researcher and
you want to share information with a colleague on the other side of the
country or on the other side of the world, you can use a particular
protocol to transfer a file. And that's helpful. It's useful. But that's really not quite the same way
that we think about the internet today. We're not sharing cat videos. We're not booking hotel reservations,
right? That's not what we're talking about
by the end of 19 in the 1980s. And so the internet, you can think of it
as a closed system of private networks. And there are some firms that exist
that try to develop some sort of user interface a way for
people to actually leverage this utility. And so a gentleman by the name of
Tm Berners-Lee who is working out at CERN in Switzerland comes up with this concept
of the World Wide Web In the late 1980s. And really it's a sense of web pages
of content that are linked together and the ability for
people to modify that content, which is at the heart of this idea. So Berners-Lee Outed CERN
develops the World Wide Web and it quickly becomes adopted by
early users because of the ease in which they can develop content and
link it together. So on top of all these networks that
are interconnected, you now have a set of instructions that allow users
to develop their own content and to create linkages with other
content on other networks. So there's an information layer that's
put on top of all these network devices. And so one of the very first popular
applications that's developed to navigate the World Wide Web
is something called mosaic. And it becomes quickly the most
popular web browser very early on. And by 1993, the World Wide Web becomes
the dominant way to utilize the Internet. Tim Berners-Lee helps develop and
further move this particular set of technology forward by helping to form
the worldwide consortium in 1994, which is basically a way for
them to manage content. We'll talk more about governance of
the World Wide Web in another episode. And at this particular point in time,
Silicon Valley Investment really starts driving additional web
technology development. And so what we start to see is that
there's a move from most of this work being developed in the western Europe and
in the east coast of the United States, and it starts to get moved
over to the West Coast. So in the early 1990s, Mosaic is
the early leader in browser technology. And starting in 1993 1994, the core
development team of Mosaic picks up and goes out and
forms its own corporation called Netscape. Some of you may have heard this
company does not exist anymore. At the same time,
the Microsoft corporation comes up with a competitor browser platform
called Internet Explorer. Many of you have probably have
heard of this particular browser. And so what you see in the 1990s is
intense competition between Netscape and Microsoft, and they quickly dominate
the entire market of rather for browser technology. So the World Wide Web continues
to develop throughout the 1990s, and which started off in essence
in a laboratory environment in 1990, out at CERN,
by the end of the decade, has over 350 million people
utilizing the World Wide Web. Imagine that m,
something that is just dreamed up in 1990, 10 years later starts
to dominate globally. It's the user-friendly ability of
the World Wide Web to develop content and to link it together. That makes it the first killer app. So the takeaways from this
particular episode are first and foremost, the standardization,
privatization and scaling in the internet that we saw and
we talked about in the prior episode, really sets us up for a new set of
technologies, the World Wide Web. It sparks a new round of competition
between a couple of corporations specifically Netscape and Microsoft. And by the end of the decade, we now see
the World Wide Web as the dominant way in which users leverage the internet. In our next episode, we're going to talk about how
the World Wide Web is continue to develop. See you next time.