[MUSIC] Hi, welcome back to cybersecurity for
everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last episode we talked about the
threat actor type criminal organizations. And in this episode, I want to actually
walk through a particular case study of a cyber attack
conducted by a criminal. So this particular case study involves
an organization called the municipal transportation Agency of San Francisco. SFMTA, sometimes referred to as MUNI. So city, it's a city government
organization in San Francisco. That operates buses, light rail and
the historic cable cars of San Francisco. The bus and light rail systems run
24 hours a day, 365 days a year. Roughly weekly ridership
approach is about 700,000. Operates 75 transit lines and
roughly 151 light rail cars. So fairly significant sized transportation
organization for a major city. >> The San Francisco municipal
transportation agency has contained a cyber attack that
disrupted its ticketing systems over the thanksgiving weekend. The cyber intrusion forced the agency,
known as MUNI, to offer free services over the weekend. According to an agency spokesman, they
decided to disable fare gates to spare their customers any
troubles with traveling. The hack had no other effect on
the transit services operations. MUNI announced in an update on their site
that the situation has been contained. Now they are prioritizing restoration
of their internal computer systems. >> So starting in November 25th 2016, riders encountered a variety of signs,
including out of service, free entry. And in fact,
several of the computer terminals, including ticketing kiosks at a variety
of different stations throughout the immune system had, you are hacked
sprawled across their screens. So the initial assessment of this
particular cyber event, with that over 2100 computers might have been directly or
indirectly impacted by this event. That all ticketing kiosks across 120 light
rail stations had to be taken offline. All gates to the rail
platforms were left open. And free admission was
provided to passengers. Bus schedules that were normally done
on a computer had to be developed and delivered by hand. Payroll systems in some administrative
functions completely disrupted. Their email system taken offline. It is estimated that they lost over
half a million dollars a day because of this particular event. So the investigation of this
particular cyber event, indicated that they had been
penetrated by ransomware spread throughout a large segment
of its operational network. The initial access factor
was likely a year old vulnerability in one specific
internet connected device. The piece of ransomware that
was used to shut down and disrupt portions of community network
was a common ransomware variant. A large number of machines,
well, over 900 suggests that this particular attack
use network infrastructure to move that piece of malware
throughout most of its network. The payment that was demanded $73,000, was typical of other recent ransomware
attacks in the United States. So how did MUNI recover from
this particular attack? Well, first of all, the organization decided that they
were not going to pay the ransom. They had also done something really smart. Which was to create not only backup files,
they containerized their system so that they could recover very
quickly over three days. 75% of the computers that were affected,
are restored within a single day. The remaining 25% were down for
more than 24 hours. Some taking as long as three
days to fully recover. But the important thing was that buses,
light rails and the cable cars are actually able to
operate normally during this time period. Even if they're not collecting
revenue from the tickets. We've seen similar attacks in the years
since against other municipal governments. These include Atlanta,
Baltimore, New Orleans, and over 23 local governments
in the state of Texas. So what can we take away from
this particular case study? Well, first of all,
possibly a single thread actor. But we don't know for certain it could have been part of
a broader criminal organization. Leveraged a vulnerability in
a single internet connected system. They leverage that vulnerability
to push a variant of ransomware across an entire operational
network at the MUNI system. Most of the ticketing chaos and
many of the administrative functions, including their apparel system and
their email was taken offline. The threat actor in this
case demanded roughly $73,000 in ransom to unlock those systems. But MUNI refused to pay and
they were able to recover most of their systems in
a relatively short period of time. But we're starting to see in
the years since this attack, increasing numbers of ransomware
attacks against municipal governments. Including in places like Atlanta,
in Baltimore and in 23 specific municipalities
in the state of Texas. So this problem is not going away. In this case study did a nice job
of framing some of the issues that municipal governments are facing
from criminal organizations. In our next episode, we're going to talk
about a different threat actor, activists. I hope to see you next time.