[MUSIC]
Hi, welcome back to cybersecurity for everyone. I'm Dr Charles harry. In this episode, I want to talk about
the next phase of hacking, command and control. Recall hacking is a process, and
we want to talk about the command and control as a way to connect
back to the installed software that the threat actor is put in play. So what is command and control? Well, once the threat actors
install their software, they have established a connection
between the malware and other devices under their control,
that's what command and control is. The goal here is to covertly provide
instructions to their malware, doesn't do them any good if they get
caught either by an anti virus program or by a cyber defender. Remaining hidden and obfuscating
the direct connections back to their infrastructure as of paramount
importance to the threat actor. So what are some common themes
with command and control? Well, first,
they want to protect their communications. The threat actors want to protect
the communications between themselves and the malware that they've
installed on their target. And so they're going to use
things like encryption. They may also use either off
the shelf techniques, or maybe even custom methods in order to
also protect their communications. They also want to try to blend
in into their environment. So remember, the goal here is to covertly
communicate with the malware on target. So I'm going to try to use
a lot of common ports, and make my traffic blend in with what looks
like completely normal network traffic. I might use common ports like Port 80 or
443, which are affiliated with web traffic. So if I am a system administrator and
I'm looking at traffic in my network, and I see a lot of Port 80 and 443,
I may think to myself, well, those are my users just surfing the web. It may not be malicious. I also may want to relay commands
using perfectly legitimate social media sites, or
other types of web services. The idea here is that if a system
administrator is looking at the traffic and the location to where that
traffic is coming from or going to, and they see a common social
media site like Instagram, or even Facebook, they may say,
well that seems fairly legitimate. Some of my users in my network may want to
go ahead and check their Instagram page or check their Facebook page
while they're at work. So I'm blending into my environment. Finally, I want to disguise the real
origin of the communications, right? So I want to not directly connect to my
malware from my own personal computer, from the threat actor, right? And the reason being is that if
my malware is discovered, and they trace my connection from my personal
computer, my hacking computer, all the way back to the targeted machine, then
law enforcement would probably have a very easy time coming up to my house, knocking
on my door and putting me in handcuffs. So I want to redirect my
communications through a third party, oftentimes what we call a proxy. So there's established proxies like the
onion router or tor, you may have heard of that before, but we can also use
our own custom configurations, right? Other compromised systems to
include cloud virtual machines. I could spend those up and
your most favorite cloud provider, right? So there are ways in which I disguise and redirect traffic to make it
that much more difficult for people to identify who's
actually doing the attacking. So let me give you an example,
if I'm a threat actor, but I might actually set up first or
a set of proxies. And they could be one, two, three, four,
you could have hundreds of proxies, it really depends on the threat actor and
their sophistication and their resources of course. If there are obvious, they may not have
a lot in the way of financial resources so they may use to establish
proxies like tor. However, if you're an APT, advanced
persistent threat, and you have millions of dollars at your disposal, you may
go out and set up your own proxies. Those proxies in turn can
communicate with other devices, such as cloud virtual machines,
that I've stood up and now I can connect my proxies to other
devices before I actually hit my target. So in this very simple example,
my traffic that I'm sending back and forth between my malware, is not going
directly from my personal computer as the attacker, I'm actually going
through at least two different layers. The idea here is to obfuscate
where the information, where those packets are going to and from. Make it that much more difficult for
people to identify me as the attacker. So let me give you an example of
a creative use of command and control. So in 2017, a security company ESET, investigated a particular advanced
persistent threat, Turla, okay? Turla had compromised a lot of different
websites, that when users would go and visit it too early,
would attempt to download their malware. They would attempt to exploit and
install their malware onto user devices. The malware when executed and installed
would try to resolve a particular URL address that contained the overall
command and control web domain. Now, here's where it gets clever. The attackers had hidden
the address of the domain in the comments section of
Britney Spears's Instagram page. Britney Spears, most of you probably
know is a world famous singer. So imagine that, in one comment section
of a very specific picture that Britney Spears had posted on her
Instagram page, there were comments that when you looked at it seemed really
frankly not to make a lot of sense. But encoded in that particular set of
comments, were the instructions for this particular piece of malware to communicate
back to a command and control server. It's pretty clever. So that specific comment
of that specific photo, was used to point the malware to
the right command and control server. I think this example highlights a lot
of the creativity we see that threat actors oftentimes employ to stay hidden,
and to keep their malware operating as long as possible for
them to achieve their objectives. So that leads us to this
concept of attribution. Threat actors will use proxies,
common communication ports and creative techniques, to manage and
hide their activities. So those communications remember are often
encrypted, and there are multiple layers of redirection that are going on
to hide the location of the threat actor. And so it can be difficult to
attribute specific tools or techniques to an individual. This is what we call attribution. And you can see with all the complexity
we're introducing, how hard it might be for threat researchers to actually
identify who is behind the attack. And we see threat actors using ingenious
techniques to hide in plain sight. I think this really underscores
the creativity that we see amongst thread actors. So what are some of the take aways? Well remember, hacking is a process, and the 6th phase is what we call command and
control. And command and control, really
are the actions used to communicate, manage and hide a threat actors activity
and connect them with their malware. We can use custom or
off the shelf techniques, and attribution can be difficult because
of the interplay of proxies, encryption and
even hiding incoming traffic. In our next episode, we're going to talk
about the threat actors actions on target, as the final phase of the hacking process. I hope to see you next time.