Hi, welcome back to cybersecurity for
everyone. I'm Dr.Charles Harry. In this episode, we're going to talk about the next
phase of the hacking process delivery. So remember hacking is a process, there are several different steps we have
to undertake in order to conduct hacking. And in this episode we're
going to talk about delivery. So what is Delivery? Well, at this point of
the hacking process, the Threat Actors has finished
weaponizing an exploit to take advantage of the specific
vulnerability in the system. They can use any number of
techniques to deliver an exploit. Delivery can include a couple
of different examples. These include, E-mail or Social Media, even a Thumb Drive or
even access to a particular website so that when you visit that website
it throws the exploit at you. The goal is to get the exploit
that you've created to the target of interest that is
fundamentally what delivery is. So what are some of these
Delivery Techniques? Well, first of all, there are Multiple
Techniques, a lot of different ways. I could potentially
compromise your network. So one example of a really common
technique is something called Spear Phishing. A Spear Phishing is really just about
sending a direct message to your target. And that can include things like
an attachment, like a word document or a pdf or even an Excel file with
the hope that you double click and open that particular document. Or it could just be a link. That you click on. It can also include access through
what we call the Supply Chain. So organizations may partner with other
firms to allow it to conduct business. So for instance,
if I'm a firm that manufactures tires, I probably have a lot of
different vendors that I use. If those vendors have potential
access to my network, I can maybe compromise one of the vendors. Swim through their network
to get access to yours. It might include Removable Media,
USB Thumb Drive or removable drive. Might be a way in which if I've
compromised that particular device, I can use that to help compromise
your system and deliver my exploits. I might even just be able to
take advantage of weaknesses in the public facing applications
that you're running. For instance, if you have a web server
that is running that is just not patched. For all the known vulnerabilities
that is associated with it. I might just be able to brute force
my way directly into your network. So what are some of the Goals
of the Delivery Phase? Well, it's really focused on
getting that exploit to the target. And depending on the technique that
is used to exploit that target, human interaction might
actually be required. I might need that human to double
click on the particular file or to click on the link. So while yes, the exploit focuses
on vulnerabilities of the technical system in the delivery process. I'm also leveraging weaknesses
in the human system. Can I convince you that this particular
E-mail attachment is something of interest to you. If I send you an E-mail on a random topic,
that makes no sense to you in the way that it's worded, are you likely to
open up that particular attachment? Or if I send you an E-mail on its subject
that's related to a hobby that you enjoy, maybe you're more likely to open it. So understanding your target and
understanding the human dimension is fundamentally important
in the hacking process. The focus here is an enabling or
executing the exploit. And when we talk in the next
section about execution, we will pick up on this particular threat. So what are some of the takeaways? Well again, hacking is a process and Delivery is the third
phase in that process. Delivery techniques are all about getting
that exploit to the target itself. Once at the target we want
that exploit to be executed. And in our next section we'll talk
more thoroughly about this process. There are several techniques that we can
use to deliver our particular exploit. And they include things like E-mails or
direct messaging through social media, USB thumb drives, even supply chains. In our next episode,
we're going to talk about exploitation and installation as the next two
phases in the hacking process. Hope to see you next time.