Hi, welcome back to
cybersecurity for everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry, in our last video we talked about the challenge of the
threat landscape and some of the complexities. We trying to understand the
potential vulnerabilities, threat actors, a fax of the
complex attack surfaces. In this video, I
want to walk through a couple of practical
examples of things that we've actually seen
occur in the real-world to highlight those
important issues. In our first example, I want to talk about
a website defacement. A website defacement,
just think of it simply as graffiti on someone's webpage. Imagine someone has a
webpage up and they write, I don't like this particular
person on top of it. It's a very simple
way of creating a disruption to a
particular website. In this case, we go back to
the Rio Olympics in 2016, where an Iranian
weightlifter had one of his best particular
lifts disqualified. There was a particular
person at home, most likely an Iranian national, who decided that
this was relatively unfair and had
basically got online, found a vulnerability to this particular website which was attached to the International weightlifting
Federation website. I exploited this
particular vulnerability and going by the pseudonym
of Master of pain, defaces the website and basically encourages the
particular weightlifter to keep his head up
and really provides more of a message of
displacement with the IWF. In this particular case, the hacker is what we
would call a hobbyist. Someone who frankly doesn't probably have an awful
lot of skill at home, but is able to identify a particular weakness in this website and voices
his displeasure. In our second example, we actually see a
different type of attack with a different
set of actors. In April 2015, a
French News Channel, Monday TV Five was
taken off the air. Soldiers guard the headquarters
of TV sang in France after hackers took control of the channel and its websites. This was back in
April, two months ago. Now police in France say they think the cyber attack was
the work of a group of Russian hackers
known as APT 28 and not the group calling itself Islamic State as
originally suggested. It created roughly a $5.6 million financial loss
for the organization, led to no axis for the internet
for months and also had taken off part of the
transmission network for the station for
some period of time. Now the website defacement, that graffiti on the website was attributed to ISIS, a
terrorist organization. But the evidence later pointed to a Russian Federation
government activity. This is an important
example because it highlights one of the central
problems in cybersecurity. We oftentimes find that certain attacks are attributed to one group or one nation, but are oftentimes
perpetrated by another. In this particular case, the effects were much
more significant than the website defacement that we saw in the weightlifting
defacement. The actors are different. Now we're actually bringing in instead of specific individuals, we're seeing implications towards a terrorist organization and later the Russian government. Just from these two
very simple examples, we see differences in effects, we see differences in
the threat actors and differences in the overall attack against the integrated
attack surface. A third example, we see a hacking occur against a
particular hotel in Austria. In this particular case, threat actors or
hackers got access to one of the central application
servers inside the hotel, one that controlled the ability to encode the electronic keys, the keys that we
all use to get in and out of our hotel rooms. In this particular
case, the hotel lock. The keys were unable
to be encoded, basically creating a large
amount of disruption for all the new hotel guests that were coming into
this particular hotel. Unless the hotel came up
with $1500 in Bitcoins, probably worth quite a bit more today since this happened
a few years ago. But unless they
came up with $1500, the attackers would
not provide the means to unencrypt that
application server, which would allow them to
resume operations normally. In this case, we're not
talking about a nation state, we're actually talking
about criminal actors. We're talking about
particular end effects that are not about
defacing a website, but it's actually creating large-scale disruption to their normal business operations. In our final example, going to Taiwan and the Taiwan Semiconductor
Manufacturing Company, TSMC. Many of you have probably never heard of this particular
organization. But they're the supplier, the system monitor chip
components for iPhones and iPads, a central vendor for
the Apple Corporation. In this particular case, TSMC said that a number
of its computer systems its fabrication tools
were infected and they estimated that they were going
to be down for three days. In this particular case, what ends up happening
is that one of their manufacturing lines
is brought completely down. Imagine that one of the most central vendors
for Apple corporation, one of the largest
companies in the world is taken down because of
a particular hack. All because a critical vendor in its supply chain is impacted. In this particular case, we don't quite know
what the motive was, but the end effects were
really quite significant. We see revenue loss estimate
be roughly $250 million a year and the gross margin was estimated to affect at
least one percentage point. In each one of the examples
that we've talked about, whether it was the
weightlifting example, the defacement of the website, whether it was the attack on the French television station, whether it was the hit
on the Austrian hotel, or whether it was hitting a critical vendor in
Apple's supply chain. In each case, there were
differences in motive, in skill of the attacker, the target, the end effects, and the impact in the
complex attack surface. In the next video, we're going to talk about some of the practical questions
and constraints faced by policymakers to address this large and complex
threat landscape. Hope to see you next time.