Welcome back to
Cybersecurity for Everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. We've been talking about
hacking as a process. At the end of that process, hackers create an effect
on the targeted machine. As you recall,
hacking is a process. It starts with the
reconnaissance of the target, that leads to weaponization,
delivery, exploitation, installation of your malware, eventually setting up command
and control networks, all to take an
action on a target. It's at the end of the day, that's why you're there. What kind of effects
do hackers generate? Well, hackers can generate
a lot of different effects. Everything from stealing data, to generating a disruption, to a service or process. Some of these impacts are
going to be easily remedied. Still, others can be
much more significant. How do we measure the
effects of the cyber event? Well, there are different
ways to think about effects. It could be everything
from a loss of privacy, to the number of records lost, revenue loss and response
costs, market capitalization, brand effects, diplomatic impacts, even
strategic stability. What constitutes
a private problem versus a public concern? How do we actually
measure those effects? What it appears to be a fairly straightforward
question, gets really complicated. What kind of effects
do hackers generate? Well, there are what we
call direct impacts. This could be the
confidentiality of data, the integrity of data, or the accessibility
of a system. Any of those can be compromised, and so those are what we
would term direct impacts. However, there are
larger effects that can also cascade from
those direct impacts. It's not just about the single device that
loses a bunch of records, there can be cascading impacts. How do we create an inability to execute
a business process? For instance,
hackers might affect the accessibility of a particular device
in a phone center, that could create
a real problem. There's also the potential of loss of confidence
in your company. There could be a
drop in share value. There can be physical impacts due to the cascading failures. If you gained access, let's say to the sluice
gates of the dam, and open them up and
create a flood downstream, there can be a direct impact on the actual topology of the
area that you're impacting. There are effects on IT systems, direct interactions between the hacker and specific devices. You can have data stolen, you can make things inoperable. Those effects might be
measured in terms of amount of data loss or impacts
to productivity. Those direct impacts on IT Systems can cascade to
effects on the enterprise. They could have direct
impacts on human processes. Those IT systems support
human processes like payroll. Those human processes support
organizational goals, like the ability to
manufacturer tires. Effects in these case, may be measured in
terms of revenue loss, remediation costs, impacts to market capitalization
or even brand effects. Those effects on enterprises can cascade to
effects on society. As specific organizations fail, they can impact even other
organizations or individuals. If you have a particular
port facility that is compromised, that could lead to
a whole range of cascading effects on logistics supply chains for
organizations downstream. In this case, effects can be measured in terms
of physical damage, impacts to the broader economy, or even changes in people's perceptions
about information. An example of that would be the recent ransomware
attack on Garmin. A threat actor tied to a
Russian criminal group executed an attack against the Garmin
Corporation in July of 2020. Ransomware in this case, it was a variant called
WastedLocker was used, but it created severe
disruptions to the location services
for over a week. The original request by the threat actor was
for $10 million. We're not quite certain
how much they settled for, but the effects
were broadly felt, not just on the specific devices impacted by the ransomware, but more importantly, on the organizational
process they support, the broader enterprise
level goals, and even society in general that is reliant on
Garmin devices. There were specific
effects on the IT systems. Russian hackers directly
impacted specific machines that created direct impacts to productivity and access to data. But then those cascaded, are to the human processes that those IT systems supported. They created outages
and impacted revenue for the enterprise. Then the outages of services impacted millions of customers and businesses that were reliant on those Garmin GPS services. What are some of the takeaways? Well, hackers can
interact directly with devices to
create an end effect, and those impacts can
generate direct impacts. But those direct impacts can
create cascading effects. A cyber attack, therefore can generate a range of
impacts on IT systems, business processes, and the broader enterprise
or even to society at large. In our next module, we're going to
explore this concept of effects much more deeply, and we'll talk about primary, secondary, and
second-order effects. I hope to see you next time.