Welcome back to Cyber
Security for Everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. We've been talking about in the last module all about
the hacking process. At the end of that process
were the actions of the hacker or the threat
actor has on target. In this particular module, I want to focus on how
we talk about effects. Specifically, how do we
frame these effects? We know that threat
actors are motivated to exploit vulnerabilities in
systems to achieve an effect. That motivation stems
from financial purpose, nationalist, reputational,
or even activism. They exploit vulnerabilities
and utilize trade craft to position themselves in the right location
in your network. They use the hacking process and through that they
conduct reconnaissance, deliver exploits, and control access to the malwares
in your network. Then they execute intended,
sometimes unintended effects. What effect is achieved? Is this a private problem
for the organization, or is this a broader
public concern? Remember in our last episode, we talked specifically
about the range of effects and how
they are sometimes difficult to characterize. You can have effects on
IT systems where there's a direct interaction between the hacker and the
specific devices. They can have data
stolen or they can make devices inoperable. Those effects could be
measured in terms of amount of data loss or impacts
to productivity. But that's not the
only type of effect. Because the impact on
those specific devices can cascade to broader effects
across the enterprise. Specifically, the
devices that are impacted affect human processes. Things like payroll
or the ability to manufacture a product
or a service. Those human processes
that support the organizational goals
can also be disrupted. Those effects can be measured
in terms of revenue lost, remediation costs, impacts
to market capitalization, or even brand effect. Then there's the broader
effects on society. As organizations fail, they can impact other organizations
or individuals. Those impacts could be physical, economic, or
behavioral in nature. What effect do hackers generate? We have the entire
hacking process from reconnaissance
to actions on target. But those actions
on target lead to this ecosystem of end effects
at the IT system level, at the enterprise level, or even at society. Not all cyber attacks
then generate the same type and
severity of effect. Some cyber attacks
are going to generate large impacts on specific
targeted systems, but have no discernible effect on the enterprise's operations. Other cyber attacks might
not impact many computers, but might cripple an organization's
ability to function. Some might even cause
profound impacts on other businesses or
society at large. The question then becomes, how can we frame and further
analyze cyber effects? Well, one way to really think more broadly about
this problem is to start to characterize these different effects
in different groupings. We can use what are
called primary effects, where these are the impacts on the directly targeted systems, and differentiate that from what we would call secondary effects, which are the impacts on organizational processes
and capability. Further distinguish that from second-order effects or the
impacts on broader society. Depending on what type of
effect you're talking about, each category can be
measured differently. Different attacks provide
different effects. Defacement of a website where
the content is modified, the files are quickly
restored, maybe in, perhaps as few as 30 minutes, really is probably not going to directly impact
your ability to, let's say manufacture tires. The cyber attack on something
like defacing a website, the effect is primarily
going to have primary and localized effects on the IT systems
that were attacked. But that might be completely different than ransomware
being deployed on an assembly line where
devices that are controlling the manufacturing line are made completely inoperable
for 72 hours. There's no manufacturing
that's able to take place during
that period of time. The cyber attack creates
primary, secondary, and maybe even second-order
effects because other firms that are relying
on those manufactured tires, like a car manufacturer, may have difficulty meeting
their own obligations. What are some of the takeaways? Well, cyber attacks can
generate a range of effects. While some attacks only
affect the targeted machines, others can create larger
emergent impacts. It's useful to categorize
these effects as primary, secondary, or second-order
effects or impacts. In our next episode, we're going to explore
primary effects. I hope to see you next time.