Welcome back to
Cybersecurity for Everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last episode, we talked about the
concept of governance. In this episode, I want to
drill into that a little bit and specifically talk about
governance of the Internet. In this particular episode, I want to talk about
a couple of areas of governance as it
relates to the Internet. We're going to talk a
little bit about how we manage technical structures
on the Internet, we're going to talk a little bit about the protection
of information, the governance surrounding that, we'll talk about the idea of risk to critical infrastructure, those critical systems that
support everyday life, and finally, a little bit about governance at the
international relations level. Let's talk about
technical governance and the standpoint of
a single technology. In this particular diagram, I've just indicated that we
have an automobile that is connected to a set of services somewhere
out on the Internet. What we're starting
to see more and more of in a lot of cities across the world is so-called
smart city infrastructure. Oftentimes, that's a way for the infrastructure on
the roadways to actually communicate with the car and provide information
to city planners and the users of particular roadside
infrastructure to help alleviate
things like traffic. In this particular diagram, I've just indicated a couple
of connection points. The first, the car
is connected to not only some of the sensors
that are existing on, let's say, streetlights,
but it's also maybe connected to other cars as well. There are certain types of technical questions that
have to be answered, such as what kind of encryption, if any is needed? Further, that information is communicated more broadly to other networks on the Internet, it may traverse over satellites. Who actually decides the
orbits of those satellites? That's a governance question
at a very technical level. That information may
flow to a datacenter. There might be a
question about, well, what country should I allow my citizens' information
to be stored at? That's a good question. Further, there might be other connections
that are occurring. The question might be, well, what frequency am I
allowed to communicate on? Who makes that determination? Further, what are the
instructions that I need to follow in order to
route that information? What are the institutions and processes involved with that? Finally, what constitutes
private information? Is the information
that's actually being transmitted protected
or not protected? Who makes that decision? What's the threshold? Even for a single technology, it can get really
complicated very quickly. Technical standards exist
for the application layer. They have to be
developed and agreed to. At the routing level, there are routing
protocols that have to be potentially strengthened, agreed to, and adopted. The privacy standards might
need to be refigured. Who comes up with
those standards? Are those standards applied
only at the local level, the state level,
the federal level? Who makes that determination? Finally, there might be services that are
being provided by a private organization
that actually need to be regulated
by the public sector. That particular set of sensors
that is communicating with the car may actually be controlled by a
private organization. Should the government
have the ability to regulate their operations? Well, it might depend. These are all good examples, even for a single technology of all the different types of
questions one has to answer. How do we manage those
technical structures? We need institutions
and processes that are associated with the
deep research and the engineering requirements
of the technology. We need institutions that
align technical standards and the policy needs at all different parts of that stack:
at the application layer, the network layer, and
at the physical layer. One example would be the World Wide Web Consortium as a way to manage standards
at the application layer. Another example might be the International Corporation
for Assigned Names and Numbers or ICANN. We talked a little bit about
that in a prior episode. Those are examples
of institutions and processes that are involved
in managing this technology. That's a governance structure. One other institution I
want to talk a little bit about is the Internet
Architecture Board or the IAB. The IAB provides long-range technical direction
for Internet development. They create essentially architectural oversight
for the Internet, for a variety of
protocols and procedures. They are providing a lot of
that technical governance. It's a common way that
people from all over the world can collaborate and come up with the
rules of the game. They manage a lot of those Internet
standards through what is called the request for
comment or the RFC series. That's technical
structures, but how do we manage the protection
of information? What is kind of a
governance structure for protecting information? Well, it's a distinct set of governance challenges
around this issue. Because unlike
technology, which you're seeking a central standard
globally for how things work. When it comes to
the protection of information, there
different viewpoints. What is considered
protected information? Is your name alone, your first name, last
name, consider protected? Maybe, maybe not. Is your address
considered protected? How about your
biometric information? That might be a
little different. Who comes up with those rules? Customer records, health
information, login information, geolocation, all may be
protected or not. It depends. Different standards exist that define different thresholds.
What do I mean by that? There might be industry-specific
standards that exist. Some very specific
industries have definitions for what
is to be protected. Examples might be
something called HIPAA, the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act, that talks about the privacy related to information
associated with your health, or the Gramm Leach Bliley Act, which deals with financial
protections of information. You might have protections that are defined at the state level. A couple of examples
might include the Maryland Personal
Information Protection Act or the California
Consumer Privacy Act. They defined different threshold
for what is protected. You might seem to think, "Well, this is pretty straightforward. Any information about me
should be protected." Well, really, there might be certain
thresholds that need to be met. For instance, if there's a cybersecurity breach on a particular organization and
they steal a single record. Is there now an onus on the
business to notify all of its customers that there was a breach and only one
record was stolen? State jurisdictions
may say, "No, that seems to be an undue
burden on that business." We'll establish a
threshold 1,000, 10,000, 15,000, a
million records. They have to make
that determination of what that cutoff is. That's important when it
comes to the level of protection that businesses need to apply for cyber attacks. There might be
national standards. An example coming from
the European Union is the General Data Protection
Regulation, or GDPR, that establishes pretty
strict guidelines on what is to be protected and the roles and
responsibilities for people that are holding
consumer information. We might also need to manage the risks to
critical systems. There are some systems
that we rely on as part of our everyday life that are so important that we need
some level of governance. Power, water, sewer,
transportation are all examples of
critical infrastructure that needs some
level of protection. The challenge is, is that
the vast majority of these critical systems are actually owned by
private organizations. Those private organizations
have to work in contexts of local state and
federal officials who help to identify the
overall risk to society. There's a governance
structure that is needed, processes and institutions that need to manage these risks. Finally, we have the issue of managing
international relations. This is really complicated. Countries define cybersecurity
slightly differently. Some are concerned not only
with protection of systems, just protecting those
technical systems, but they're also
concerned about content. Countries like China, Russia, Vietnam, I couldn't
include several others, are concerned about the
content on the Internet, and they perceive that
as a potential threat. So when they define
cybersecurity, it's not simply about protecting critical systems or trying to prevent breaches of information, they are also concerned about the information that's
been posted online, and they consider that
is cybersecurity threat. Why does that matter?
There have to be international agreements if you want to come up with the
standard set of rules. What are the international
forums that exist that can determine what is to be
protected? How do we do that? What is the form by
which countries can decide what type of
offensive actions, for instance, can
be permissible? Can we come to an
agreement that there are in fact some instances in which offensive use of cyber capability
can be leveraged. Likewise, are there
some things that are so egregious that we actually
don't want those approved? Maybe we come to
an agreement that all countries will choose not to use cyber means to take
down a hospital network. Maybe that's a standard rule
that we want to agree to. We use something, in
this particular case, the United Nations Group
of Government Experts as a way to try to come up
with a common understanding. But this is really challenging, because oftentimes
countries can't even agree on a
standard definition. This is a real problem. The point of all of this
in this entire episode is to talk about governance not simply from a
technical level, but governance addressing
a myriad of problems. Why does this matter? Why does this really
matter for cybersecurity? Technology and human
systems interact. Going back to that
very first episode, remember cyber is about
the intersection between technology and human systems
and generates complexity. The standards and the means
in which we implement those standards are agreed to by humans. We're not robots. There are people that get together and make
these rules up. Some changes in technology
might be warranted. We might decide we want to adopt this new technology
because there's some beneficial aspect
of human society, but it might be difficult
to actually implement that technology and
practice and uniformly. Because we may only
be able to implement technology in some areas
and not in other areas, we create an uneven
surface that sometimes exposes vulnerabilities
across an entire stack. Different standards
of protection, different governance across
those technical structures and organizations create
those vulnerabilities, and hackers can take
advantage of it. That it's that
complexity of what we call the attack surface is what hackers use in order to take advantage
of the situation. What are the takeaways
from this episode? First, governance
of the Internet takes place across a variety
of different topics, it's not simply a question
of managing the technology. Technical governance
happens across all elements of the stack. The application layer, the network layer, the
physical layer, all have specific questions
that have to be answered, that technology has
to be developed and agreed to and it has
to be rolled out. That requires human processes. Information is governed by a
variety of national, state, and local governments; the ability to determine what
should be protected. Remember there isn't
a uniform definition. Critical infrastructure, the risk posed by
hackers against critical systems
is managed both by the private sector and
the public sector. Relations between
governments happens in an international environment, and oftentimes countries
don't even agree on simple definitions like
what is a cyber attack? Governance of this complexity exposes
possible vulnerabilities. This is really at the
heart of cybersecurity. In our next episode, we're going to take all
this information that we've learned about the
history of the Internet, and how the Internet
actually works, and governance, and
now we're going to actually start talking
about the threat actors. Who are the people that are taking advantage of
these vulnerabilities? Why are they doing it?
See you next time.