Welcome back to
cybersecurity for everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last module, we talked about the threat
actors and their motivations. In this module I
want us to actually talk about what hacking is. It's one of these terms
that is often thrown around very loosely in popular culture, but it's really a very,
very interesting process. That's what I want to try
to cover in this section. What is hacking? Well, in the popular culture, we have this sense that hacking
is done by a lone actor. In our last section, we found out that that's
really not the case. There are lots of
different groups with different motivations. But more importantly, there's this perception
that there's always this quick
facilitation of access even to the most
sensitive of networks. A good example of this would be the movie hackers from 1995, which actually depicts hackers
flying through cyberspace. It seems a little ludicrous, but that was certainly the
perception 20 years ago. There's almost always
this perception that there's universal success. That if the hackers just have a few minutes or a couple
hours to work on it, they can bring down all
the traffic lights in a city or take down
electrical power grid. Well, is that really the case? That's what I want to
explore in this section. But the reality of hacking
is really quite different. It's different than what
we see in popular culture. It's much more complicated. In fact, the harder the hack is, the more sensitive the network that you're trying
to gain access to, it likely takes more time,
resources, and skill. There's a range of efforts, some of which really are quite trivial or quite
easy to pull off, and others that are much,
much more complicated. For example, if I want
to gain access to, let's say, the webpage
of your local dentist. That might be a lot
easier to access than, let's say, the defense
network in the Pentagon. Fundamentally, hacking is
a collection of efforts that culminate in achieving
a particular end goal, and that's a key thing
to take away here, is that hacking is a process, is a collection of efforts. It is not any single effort, it is a collection of efforts. What are some examples of these types of
hacking activities? Well, they include things like investigating your target's
webpage for information. Well, that doesn't necessarily seem like that's a
hacking activity, but it's absolutely fundamental. Things like who works
at the company? What are the different
parts of the organization? What are their emails? These are all examples
of hacking activity. The preparation of what
we would call lure file. You're trying to entice
someone to actually click on a particular file like a Word document or
a PDF document that actually may hide in
it malicious code. There's a certain amount of effort that's required to make a file that's compelling enough for someone
to actually open. There's a little bit of
psychology involved. Maybe identifying the
useful vulnerability in a program that's running
on a particular system. That might be an example
of hacking activity. Or being on the device, how do I actually increase
my user permissions so that I'm able to actually install the programs
that I want. Or even enabling my
malware, my bad software, to communicate with the other
devices under my control. These are all examples
of hacking activity and they fall into very
specific groups that we're going to
talk about in a second. We should think of
hacking is a collection of activities moving
towards an objective. Activities that are conducted by a specific threat actor are all focused on achieving
some objective. Now, this a really
important point. Hackers are not hacking
just for the sake of it. They're trying to
achieve something, either the acquisition of data or potentially to
disrupt your activities. These activities that a hacker or the threat actor engages in can be grouped together in a series of
descriptive categories. Those categories are brought together into what
we call hacking. Linking those efforts
together forms this process. If hacking is a process, we might be able to
leverage what are known as frameworks to think and group these activities together in a
coherent framework. Several of these
hacking frameworks exist in the world today. Two of the more popular
hacking frameworks include the Lockheed Martin "Kill Chain" and the Mitre ATT&CK Framework. We'll talk about both of these
frameworks in this course. Both of the approaches
are useful in trying to categorize groupings
of activities that are all part of this
broader hacking process. Let's talk about
the general process of hacking at a very,
very high level. In this particular case, we're going to layout the
Lockheed Martin "Kill Chain". You'll notice that this
particular framework consists of several different groupings of activities that we're going
to explore in this module. The first is reconnaissance, and this is really
an exploration of your target and includes a lot of different activities that are not
necessarily technical. They can include things like general web research on the organization that
you're trying to go after. After reconnaissance is the
concept of weaponization. Where after I've gathered as much information
as I possibly can, usually tactical
information but also including organizational
and social information, I want to be able to identify vulnerabilities in your network. I'm going to come up
with an exploit that allows me to take advantage of one of those vulnerabilities. After weaponization
comes delivery. I need to actually deliver that particular weaponized
exploit to your network. There's lots of different
techniques I can use. Exploitation. Once I've actually delivered the weapon
to the target and the person clicks on the link or they do some other activity, that I'm actually
exploiting your device. Once I'm on your device, I actually want to install
my malicious program. Once I've installed
my malicious program, I want to make sure
that I can command and control that particular
piece of malware. Once I've done that, then I'm going to
take specific actions on that particular target. Things like stealing
information or potentially disrupting that particular
computer device or even start the process
all over again and look to do reconnaissance now
I'm inside your network, but to look for other
potential targets that I can swim to. As you can see, hacking is a process
of activities and each one of these groupings of activities are extremely detail. What are some of the takeaways? Well, in popular culture, we incorrectly think
about hacking as being done by a lone
genius hacker and it's a specific set of
activities that very quickly allow them access into even the most
sensitive networks. But the truth is, is that it's a series of activities that are
linked together, and so those efforts strung together become a
process of hacking. Two very common
hacking frameworks include the Lockheed
Martin "Kill Chain" and the Mitre
ATT&CK Framework. In our next episode, we're going to talk about
the very first grouping of activity, reconnaissance. I hope to see you next time.