[MUSIC] Hi, welcome back to cyber security for
everyone. I'm Dr Charles Harry, in this episode,
I want to talk a lot about how data actually moves from one point
of the earth to the next. And it's a process that
we call encapsulation. So how does data actually move? We know from our prior conversations that,
the internet allows for a broad set of connections between
interdependent networks and they communicate with one another. The World Wide Web is
a set of content that sits on top of those independent networks. But the question is how does data actually
move from one point of the earth to the next? If I'm in Maryland, and I want to
communicate with someone who Mumbai, how does that actually happen? How does that data move from one
point in the earth to the next? And that's what I want to
talk about more today. So if I'm an individual city and let's say
paris France and I want to communicate with someone else, let's say in Maryland,
how does that actually happen? Yes, of course, we want to look at the broad set of
interconnections between networks. This is just a simple visualization
of a lot of independent networks on the internet. The question is,
how does that data actually move? That's the concept of encapsulation
that I want to talk about a little bit in this episode. So the ability for devices to communicate
with one another require instructions and we call these instructions protocols. We've talked a little bit about
some protocols in earlier episodes. Some of these protocols, some of these instructions relate
to applications that you're using. Still others relate to the routing
of that information and still others relate to the physical mediums in
which that information is transmitted. We bundle those instructions
together using a concept that we call encapsulation. So, if you're using an application,
whether it's social media or email, or
even a web processing application, that you're eventually going to send
in a file transfer to another computer. There are a set of instructions
that are included along with it, that tell the device and tell the network
how to interact with that information and where to send it. So depending on the application that I'm
using, there are set of instructions. Those instructions are then paired
with other instructions that deal with the routing of that information. And then further those instructions are
then passed down to the physical medium. How that information is actually
transmitted over some sort of energy waveform. Now, we're going to talk more about
specific portions of these instructions in other episodes. But it's enough right now to
understand that these instructions are included there, they are encapsulated within one another,
kind of like Russian nesting dolls. The dolls in which, a smaller doll fits
inside a larger doll which fits inside, yet another larger doll, that's in
essence what we're talking about. So we use something called the OSI model
or the Open Systems Interconnection model. And it's a way to think about
communications functions that are completely independent
of the technology or the structure underpinning it. And there are multiple what we call
layers involved in this model and those layers together form
what we call the stack. So let me show you kind of a visualization
of what I mean by the Osc model, if I want to send and encapsulate data. So I'm actually using a laptop and
I'm writing an email and I want to hit send on that email, I need to encapsulate those
instructions in some sort of structure. And so the OSI model has
seven different layers and remember those layers formed the stack. So we're going to start up at the very
top here at the application layer and that information is then packaged and
encapsulated at different layers. So we have a presentation,
a session layer, transport, network, data link and physical. Now, for the purposes of our conversation, we're really only going to talk
about three layers in this model. We're going to talk about the application
layer, we're going to talk about the network layer and we're going to
talk about the physical layer and we're going to talk about those
layers in future episodes. But, it's enough to understand that
the instructions that you are providing at the application layer is encapsulated
in all these other layers as well. That information, once it's all packaged
up, is then sent over a physical medium that could be light, it could
be radio waves, it could be microwaves. We'll talk more about that
in a different episode. But that wave form can be transmitted
from one point of the earth to the next. So if I want to communicate with my
friend in Mumbai, and I'm in Maryland, all that information, that's incorporating
in that email is encapsulated. All these various instructions about
where to route it and how to send it and how to deal with that information,
is packaged up and sent. My friend once they receive it,
their computer receives it, now can unpack all of that information,
the instructions are included. Once that information is received,
it gets unpacked, so it moves away from just the physical
medium and gets unpacked. And then the network understands
what to do with that data. And then later the application
knows what to do with that data. So that email that I have sent
my friend is now received, the instructions are unpacked and
now that email can actually be read, so encapsulation is fundamental. It's a fundamental concept in the global
telecommunications environment and it includes data from
the applications that you're using. But it also includes instructions for
the recipients application, as well as all the infrastructure that
is required in order to route it. That data, the packets,
the frames, the bits, all the pieces of information
that are included, are all sent around the world using this
globally interconnected set of networks. Laptops, phones, critical infrastructure
and all the other devices that we know and love, send and
receive information this way. So, why does this matter for us when
we want to talk about cyber security? Well, hackers leverage weaknesses
in those different layers, because remember the layers
represent a conceptual model. But within each one of those layers
are protocols, instructions how to deal with that information and
some of those protocols are pretty old. They're 40 or 50 years old and
so some of them have weaknesses. And hackers look for
the weaknesses in those instructions and they use those weaknesses to help them
steal information or to disrupt services. Understanding how data is packaged,
routed, transmitted is absolutely fundamental to understanding
the set of threats that we face. Complexity in the technical systems and
the human organizations they support is absolutely at
the heart of cybersecurity. That's why we need to talk
about encapsulation and the different layers of the OSI model. So what are the takeaways? Information must be transmitted from
one point of the earth to the next. That's how we communicate, the
instructions for that data and how it's packaged, routed, transmitted is done
through a process called encapsulation. The OSI model is a conceptual approach for
how we understand those layers in the stack and
the potential weaknesses at each and every one of those layers are at
the heart of cybersecurity. That's what the hackers are exploiting
when they want to steal your information or disrupt a critical service. In our next episode, we're going to
talk about the application layer, I hope to see you next time.