Hi, welcome back to
Cybersecurity for Everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last episode, we talked about
the network layer. In this episode, I want
to talk much more about how data physically
moves around the Earth. We're going to talk about something called
the physical layer. Going back to our OSI
data layer model, we're now at the
bottom of the stack, at the physical layer. This is where we actually translate the logical
into the physical. Specifically, how do we move that data across
physical geography? I want to move my data from my location to somewhere
else around the world. The problem is, how do I translate all those
instructions that have been encapsulated at the
application layer and the network layer into something
that can actually move? How can I leverage
the physical world in our understanding of how the physical world actually
works to move our data? That's what the physical
layer is trying to do. We want to look at the
electromagnetic spectrum. Many of us who have taken a high-school physics course
have seen this chart before. We have different types of
energy and energy wavelengths. We use some of those portions of the spectrum to communicate. I want to talk about three specific technologies that leverage different
parts of the spectrum. First we'll talk
about fiber optics, then we'll talk about
terrestrial microwave, and finally, we'll talk about
satellite-based technology. All of these technologies work together to help move
data around the world. The very first technology
that I want to talk about leverages
visible light, this specific part of the
electromagnetic spectrum. I want to talk about
the first technology, fiber optics and
long-haul cables, which leverage visible
light to help move data. Fiber optic lines are
bundled together in cables, and they use those cables to cross the Earth in
multiple locations. Now you might be asking
yourself, "Well, how does it actually do that?" Well, fiber optics are
simply long tubes of glass. We're able to use light to
shine through those tubes of glass in order to transmit
basically light energy, visible light, from one point
of the Earth to the next. If you were to cut a piece
of fiber optic in half and look at it as someone was
shining light to and from, you would actually see the presence of light or
the absence of light. If I were to associate the
presence of light with a one and the absence
of light as a zero, and I posted it in a very
specific sequence, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, I might see light, light, light, no light, no light, no light. If I do that over
and over and over again, I'm transmitting
information. The presence of light, the absence of light
becomes ones and zeros. That's how data moves
in the physical world, utilizing fiber optic lines. Those cable bundles, so we took all that fiber optic and we bundled them together in cables. We usually will lay them both in the Earth as well
as along the sea bottom. They usually come ashore at
what we call landing sites. These cable bundles crisscross the Earth in a variety
of different locations. We'd leverage those
cables to move information across very,
very long distances. The vast majority of international
communications pass over this type of physical medium. Once on shore,
these set of cables come together at a variety
of different points. We'll talk about those in a bit. Here's a picture of
what fiber optics look like when you cut them in half and you're shining
light through them. Here's another picture of a cable that's being
laid into the ocean. In the distance of this photo, you can see a ship. That ship has a
very large wheel, and as it sails
across the ocean, it very slowly drops that
cable along the ocean floor. That's how they lay
cable across an ocean. In this photo you can see one of the challenges of
laid undersea cables. In this particular photo, we have a couple
of US Navy divers who are actually doing
some maintenance. Because as you would imagine, these cables, if they're sitting at the
bottom of the ocean, are going to get all sorts of barnacles and other sorts of
sea creatures that are going to be interested in these
types of cables to and include sharks who had been
known to actually bite into these cables
every so often. Now let's talk about a different technology, specifically
terrestrial microwave. Terrestrial microwave
technology uses a different part
of the spectrum. Specifically, we use a series of what are
called chained repeaters in order to transmit energy
that has been encoded with all the instructions that we had received from the
application and the network layer across
a piece of territory. The key for terrestrial
microwave is that it uses what's called
point-to-point technology, meaning that the beam that is transmitted goes from
one point in the earth directly to another point
in the earth and it has to be what we call in
the line of sight. There's some challenges with
that because as we know, the earth is round. If those two repeaters are
not close enough together, then the curvature of the
earth will cause that beam of energy to shoot out
into outer space. We need to make sure that
we are close enough so that the series of repeaters
can transmit that energy. It is constrained to
the line of sight. You need several towers grouped together in order to
move this energy. You may not have recognized
that you've seen this type of technology on
almost a daily basis. But the next time that
you're driving on a road, take a look outside the window, and every so often I guarantee you're
going to see a tower. On top of that tower,
they're usually going to have several
pieces of equipment, one of which looks like a drum. That drum is horizontally
positioned and it is transmitting
microwave energy from that particular point
to another point. In fact, if you were to
climb up that tower, look in the direction in which that drum is facing
in the distance, you're going to
see another tower with a drum that's facing you. That's the point-to-point
transmission. That is what is going on. You will see these towers
every so often along the road and that helps move energy from one point in
the Earth to the next. Remember, as part of that overall stack that
we've been discussing, encoded in that energy or all the logical
instructions about how to move that data and what to do with it once it gets
to its destination. Putting those towers
together allows you to create a terrestrial
microwave network and you can communicate and move energy and therefore the encoded
information in it from one point in
the Earth to the next. That's how that works. The last technology I want to talk about incorporates radio. Satellite technology. Satellite technology
incorporates radio waves. Satellites communicate by using those radio waves
to send signals between antennas on the Earth and the satellites that are
going around the Earth. Ground stations transmit and
receive those radio waves. Signals on the
satellites are then transmitted on what are
called transponders, which operate on slightly
different frequencies to different points
on the earth. There are roughly 1500
operating satellites going around the
Earth as we speak. The majority are operated
by the United States. But the Chinese, the Russians, and other countries
manage a set of their own satellites and they all fly around the Earth
in different orbits. What we're talking
about here is using radio waves to transmit
from a ground station all the way up to a
satellite that's going around the Earth in a
variety of different orbits and then retransmitted down to another ground station so
you're able to move energy, and therefore all those encoded instructions and the rest
of the stack across very, very large distances by going up into outer space
and then back down. That's how that works. How do all these
technologies intersect? Because we've talked
about fiber optics, we've talked about
terrestrial microwave, and we've talked about
satellite-based technologies. But unless you're planning
on building one really, really large network that covers everything
around the world, there's got to be a way
for these physical mediums to actually connect together. The physical
infrastructure comes together at very
specific points. Because remember, the
Internet is a collection of independent
in-controlled networks. We call those specific points Internet exchange
points or IXPs. Large network operators
come together at those specific Internet
exchange points that allow the data to
actually be exchanged. Different physical mediums. Fiber-optic can work with
microwave technology, which can work with
satellite-based technology. They come together. This provides the actual physical
connections and it allows those autonomous systems
that we talked about in the previous episode to
provide the logical routing. The physical connections
at the IXP works with the peering relationships for the autonomous systems. Here's a really,
really simple diagram. In this diagram, I've got a couple of different networks
that are working together. We have some
terrestrial microwave, we have some fiber-optic, and we also have some
satellite-based technology. You'll notice that
at different parts in this diagram we have an IXP. A terrestrial network comes together to work with
a fiber optic network, or that terrestrial
microwave network might come together and work with a
satellite transmission. That particular set of energy, then might moved to
another network. Maybe it's terrestrial
microwave, maybe it is a
fiber-optic network, maybe it's something else. We layer on top of that, those autonomous systems and the peering relationships
between them. From a logical standpoint, we know where we need to go, which road we need to take, but underneath all of it is
the physical infrastructure. That's how that works.
Why does this matter? Why do we go through
this exercise of talking about the different
layers in the OSI model? Well, just as we found in the app layer and just as we
found in the network layer, vulnerabilities can exist
at the physical layer. Hackers can use those
vulnerabilities to gain access or to
achieve an effect. Just as we found with the app layer and
the network layer, this potentially
offers a new vector of attack for a hacker. We have to understand
the complexities on the global telecommunication
system if we want to begin to understand the
nature of the hacking threat. What can we take away
from this episode? First of all, the physical
layer actually moves energy, and in that energy is
encoded information. It uses different parts of
the electromagnetic spectrum. Fiber optics are one
way in which we can help traverse very
long distances and they tend to carry information underneath
things like the ocean. Microwave can be used for
point to point transmission. Finally, satellites can be used to move data
over radio waves. The Internet exchange points are where it all comes together. When you pair that with autonomous systems and those
peering relationships, now you're actually
stitching together all those independent networks that we've been talking about. That's how it works. That's how data moves from one point of the
Earth to the next. In our next episode, we're going to talk a little
bit about governance and the human processes that are required in order to
manage all of this. This is incredibly
complex and requires a set of rules at all
the different levels. But those rules are not simply meant to manage
technical systems. In some cases, rules need
to be developed in order to manage human systems. I
hope to see you next time.