Hi, I'm Dr. Charles Harry and welcome
back to cyber security for everyone. In our last episode we talked about the
application layer as part of this process of encapsulation. And in this episode, I want to talk
a little bit more about how information actually routes on the internet and so therefore we're going to talk about
something called the network layer. We're now talking about the portion of the
stack that deals with routing information between independent networks. So how does data route
across the internet? And so
the fundamental problem here is that I want to move my data from my location
to somewhere around the world. The problem is that there are a lot of
independent networks that are changing constantly. So how do I know where and how to get
my information across the planet? That's the question. So there are a couple of different
things that we need to address. First. Where am I going? We talk about something called an IP
address or an internet protocol address. Second thing I may want to know
is what local road should I take? I talked about something
called autonomous systems. And third,
how do I know what roads connect to where? So we're going to talk about something
called a pureeing relationship. Answering these basic questions gives us
a little bit more insight on how data routes from one point of
the earth to another. So where am I going,
to answer that question or try to address that problem first. So we're dealing with something
that we call the Internet protocol. And it really acts as an address on the
internet, similar to your home address. The internet protocol assembles
data from all the layers above it into what we call a packet
with an address header. So kind of like an envelope with
the address on the outside. And they basically says something like
please deliver this information to something like 8.8.8.8 which is
an Internet Protocol address. So what road should I take? We want to talk about something
called an autonomous system. Autonomous system is basically
a group of IP addresses that are managed by an organization and it makes routing information between
these independent networks easier. It might include large networks like AT&T,
Sprint or Verizon. Could also include other
large organizations like IBM. The goal is to have these independent
organizations that manage thousands of internet protocol addresses
communicate with one another. So what does that actually look like? Well in this diagram we have a very
simple model with a variety of different independent networks broken up by
their AS number A 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And you'll notice that they are color
coded and the color represents the different organizations that manage
those devices and the internet protocols that are associated with each of those
particular devices, those IP addresses. So the autonomous systems
can connect to one another. But the question is, which autonomous
systems connect with one another and which ones don't they connect with? Because you can imagine
there are tens of thousands of autonomous systems
all around the world. Not all of them are going to be
directly connected to one another. So how do we know which ones
are connected to other AS structures? So how do I know where the roads connect? We'll talk about peering relationships. So autonomous systems, these group of independent organizations
that manage these thousands of internet protocol addresses have to have some way
in which they relate to one another. We call that a peering relationship. So an AS provider will broadcast
a list of other independent networks it has a connection with. It uses something called
the border Gateway Protocol. We're not really going to talk
about that in this episode, but there's another set of instructions
in which it uses to do exactly that. So even if your AS,
your autonomous system that you're a part of Does not know where 8.8.8.8 is, perhaps one of its neighbors does. That information, your information
is forwarded to a neighbor of that AS structure that knows
where to send that information. So this is just a quick example of
a peering relationship of one AS. And what you'll see in this is that
there are a variety of different AS numbers that this particular autonomous
system has a relationship with. And the goal is is that as I'm
requesting information from websites all around the world, some of those AS
structures that I have a relationship are going to know where to
route my information to. That's the advantage of
having peering relationships. So when I take a look at the large
interconnections on the internet, the value of having autonomous systems and peering relationships is it gives
you a sense of where to route data. So why does this matter? Well, vulnerabilities, just like when
we talked about the application layer, vulnerabilities exist in
several of these protocols. Hackers can use those vulnerabilities
to gain access or to achieve an effect. Software developers who are not careful
in the design of their software might introduce new vectors of attack and
network engineers who don't configure their networks appropriately
might introduce other attack vectors. So, again, complexity of human and technical systems is at
the heart of cybersecurity. Understanding each layer in the stack
is fundamentally important if you want to protect yourself. So what can we take
away from this episode? Well, first that information that deals
with routing is done at the network layer. Locations on the internet or IP addresses
are established by the Internet Protocol. Autonomous Systems are organizations that
manage large amounts of IP addresses and they relate to one another
using peering relationships. In our next episode, we're going to
talk about the physical layer, how energy actually moves from one
point of the earth to the next and how all this information that's
been encapsulated is transmitted. I hope to see you next time.