Hi, Welcome back to
cybersecurity for everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last episode
we talked a lot about how internet
technology had been developed in the lab and had started to
bring in members of the private sector to develop other parts of
internet technology. In this episode, I want
to talk a lot more about how that is further privatized
and how it's scaled. How do we actually start
building a more global utility? The fundamental
question here is, how do we manage this thing. This thing that we've built, this great idea that started
in the late '50s and early '60s and starts to develop a little bit and
become a little bit more mature in the '70s. How do we actually
manage this thing? By the early 1980s, inter networking has really
become more popular. But most of the networks that are developed
are very specific. They're built for a
particular purpose. NASA, Department of Energy
are two examples of very specific networks that
are developed utilizing this technology from
the 1960s and 1970s. A variety of
different protocols. Remember, protocols
are just simply instructions are
utilized to communicate. But they create a challenge
for broader adoption because if everyone's using different sets of instructions, it's hard to actually
create a standard. It's hard to broadly
communicate with one another. At the heart of all of these
purpose-driven networks, the way that they actually can communicate with one
another is still this ARPANET system
that was developed by DARPA starting the late 1960s
and throughout the 1970s. ARPANET is really
at the heart of all these connections of these
purpose-driven networks, which creates a problem. If we look back at the
origins of ARPANET in 1969, you'll notice in this map, there's just a handful
of the nodes that we originally discussed
in a previous episode. That starts to develop further
as time goes on in 1970, we now see connections
back to the East Coast. By 1973 it expands even further. By 1982 we can see
the development of several different
networks on both coasts and also in the heartland
of the United States. By the early 1980s, we see in essence the emergence of a
broader set of networks. But ARPANET is still
at the center. It's still the connective tissue between these
independent networks, which poses a problem. Because remember, when we first talked about the
origins of the Internet, the broader vision was that there was no single authority. We want to create a set of independent networks that have the ability to work together. If ARPANET remains at the
heart of the Internet, then we don't actually
achieve that broader vision. The goal is to allow networks to independently communicate
with one another. We look back to some
initial work that was done in the late '60s and
into the early 1970s, specifically the invention of internet protocol
and Transmission Control Protocol, or TCP. It becomes universally
adopted in 1984. Now at this time you have
to remember there were lots of different protocols
that were in use. By adopting a
universal protocol, we actually see the birth
of the modern Internet. This is a key period in the
history of the Internet. After the adoption of TCPIP
as the universal standard, the government wants to get out of the middle of this internet. ARPANET at the time had been the central
connective tissue. It's pulling itself out. It wants to incentivize the private sector to build out additional
infrastructure. While the National Science
Foundation builds out a large-scale cross-country
high-speed set of network connections. It prohibits the private sector from utilizing those
particular connections. The reason they do that is to incentivize the
private sector to build out its own
infrastructure. By doing so, the government
is further pulling itself out as being the central
node in the internet. It encourages private
sectors to now actually go out and get customers for these networks
that they're building. Again, additional incentives
by the government to make this a lot larger than
simply a research project. This leads to the first
large-scale sets of investments in the build-out
of Internet infrastructure. This is really the
first internet boom. Oftentimes, when we think
about the Internet boom, we think of the late 1990s and the World Wide Web,
things like pets.com. But this is really the first internet boom
where we start seeing broad-based private investment in large-scale infrastructure. That NSF net, that set of
high-speed interconnections, really crisscrosses
the United States and broadly connects research
centers all across the country. But the government doesn't want to get completely
out of the picture. They still want to support
research in this area. In 1986, the Supercomputer
Network Study Act of 1986 was introduced
by Senator Al Gore. This is oftentimes
you heard these jokes about Al Gore inventing
the Internet. What he's oftentimes
talking about is his support in introduction of legislation that increased investment in internet-based
technologies. That act allocated
$600 million for high performance computing and specifically looked
to accelerate the development of
high-speed networking. It also provided funding for a couple of different
research centers, one of which the National Center for Supercomputer
Applications at the University
of Illinois led to the development
of what later became the core technology behind
the mosaic web browser. We'll talk more about
mosaic in another episode. But I want to highlight the
fact that the government, while not being at the center
of the Internet anymore, by pulling itself out of running ARPANET
and having ARPANET to connect all these
various networks is not totally out
of the picture. It's just redefined its role. What are the takeaways? Well, first and foremost, the birth of the modern
Internet takes place in 1984 with the adoption
and TCP/IP protocol. Because remember
there were all these different competing
protocols out. In addition, these
broad-based incentives for the private sector to build out its own networks and for it to develop its own customer
base was a way for the government to more broadly have internet
technology be accepted. Finally, the government
wanted to support additional research
specifically in the area of high-speed networking as a
way to more readily make services on the
Internet available and useful for a variety
of different customers. In our next episode, we're going to talk about
the next internet boom. Specifically the development of the World Wide Web
and how that began to transform how we actually utilize the internet. Hope
to see you next time.