This is Cybersecurity
for Everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. We've been talking about hacking effects or
the impacts that threat actors have on variety of networks
in specific devices. We talked last time about how those effects can
be thought of or framed. In this particular module, I want to talk about
primary effects. If you recall last time, we talked about a variety
of different effects; primary, secondary,
and 2nd-order effects. Primary effects are the impacts
on specific IT systems. It's important to remember that when we think
about effects, each category can be
measured differently. Primary effects, again, are the direct impacts
on targeted devices. A cyber event is the result
of a series of actions that a threat actor will take to directly affect
targeted devices. Remember, they're going
through that hacking process, and at the end of it, they
want to do something. That something could be
something as simple as compromising data or what we
call the confidentiality. Examples of this might be spear phishing or SQL injection
attacks on databases. It could be that data
is being manipulated, or going after the integrity of those devices in that data, doing things like recording changes to records
in a database, or modifying code in a
specific application. It could also be that
those devices are made inoperable or
less effective, what we also call accessibility. Examples of that might be ransomware attacks
or data wipers. It's important to think of primary effects in
a broader category, and what we use is the
term called taxonomy. Taxonomy of end effect is really about how to think
about and break up and categorize all the
different possible end effects that can be achieved
from a cyber event. In our case, we may want to think about disruptive events. These are cyber events
that actually make inoperable or make less
effective specific devices. We may also want to think
of exploitive events, where data is actually stolen from a variety
of different devices. Let's first talk about
disruptive events. What is a disruptive event? Well, disruptive events are the effects that
disruptive attacks have, are all about making devices or the applications less effective, or frankly not work at all. There really are five broad categories we can think about. One category we might call
message manipulation, and this would be as
cyber event that really interferes with a
victim's ability to accurately present
or communicate it's message to its
user or customer base. Examples of this might include the hijacking of
social media accounts, Facebook or Instagram, or
defacing a company website. We see examples of
this all the time, where hackers gain access to, let's say, a celebrity's
Instagram page and they start making
really bad comments on it. That would be an example of a message manipulation attack. External denial-of-service
is also a disruptive event, and that's really where a
threat actor is executing a cyber attack from devices outside the target
organizations network. An example of this would
be what's called the distributed denial-of-service
attack or DDOs attack. Again, this is a very
common attack that we see, and the goal of the
particular threat actor is to make inoperable or to slow down some of the devices that are connected on
the Internet to, in a sense, either extort
money or sometimes it's just really as a broad set
of interests that they have. There's also what we would call an internal
denial-of-service attack, where threat actors are operating
now inside the network, and they're degrading or denying access to other
internal systems. If I have access to
a router and I now reset that router to factory settings and
it no longer works, then all those packets
that are traversing that network going
back and forth no longer can get to
their destination, and therefore, there's
a denial of service, but it's happening
inside the network. That is what makes it
different than a DDoS attack, where threat actors control infrastructure outside your
network and are trying to overwhelm or flood your external Internet
connected device. We can also think of some
category called data attack, where this is a cyber
event that manipulates, destroys or encrypts data
in a victim's network. A good example of this would be ransomware or data
wiper attacks, where threat actors have gained access to a specific
system and now delete the contents of a
hard drive entirely or they encrypt it so that you can't
gain access to that data. Finally, there are what we
would call physical attack. These are cyber events
that manipulate, degrade, or destroy
physical systems. The idea is that an
attack something on like a supervisory control
in data acquisition system, or what we call a skater system, that actually interfaces with
physical devices, sensors, valves, these types of things, what we often call
operational technology. If a cyber event
manipulates, degrades, or destroys the actual
physical system because they turn
the valve the wrong way and suddenly a lot of steam pressure builds up
and blow something up, that's what we would
call a physical attack. We've seen examples
of this type of disruptive cyber event
occur throughout the world. We've seen instances in
the case of Ukraine, where power attacks were conducted against
the electrical grid. We've also seen the same attack occur in other
places of the world. Primary effects, they have these direct impacts
on targeted devices. We've just talked about
disruptive attacks, but attacks can also be
exploitive in nature. What is an exploitive
end effect? Well, there are five categories
of exploitive effect, and exploitation is all about taking advantage of
the data on those systems. We're not talking about
disrupting the operations of the particular computer
device or network, what we're talking
about is stealing data. You can steal data in a
couple of different areas. The first is exploitation
of sensor information. These are cyber events that result in the loss of data from a peripheral device like a credit card reader or in even an automobile
or smart light bulb. An example of this might
be the compromise of credit card data from what's called a
point-of-sale system. These are those card readers, when you go in to buy a cup
of coffee or buy a shirt, you usually swipe your
card into a machine. Threat actors can gain access to those machines and steal
that credit card data. We will classify that as an exploitation of
sensor end effect. Now, there's also what we would call exploitation end host. These are cyber events
that steal data stored on a user's
desktop computer, laptops, or even mobile device. There are very
common examples of these types of attack include things called spear phishing, where you get that email from the Nigerian prince
or from whoever, where they want you
to click on a link. When when you click
on that link, it runs the exploit code
and it goes through that first set of processes, which is part of the delivery
process, exploitation, everything that we talked
about in the hacking process. Eventually leads to the
exploitation of that end host. The goal is to steal data
stored on that user's desktop, computer laptop,
or mobile device. There's exploitation of
network infrastructure. In this case, the cyber event
is really attempting to compromise data
through direct access to the network and equipment. These include things like routers and switches and modems. The idea is that if I gain
access to that infrastructure, then I can steal data
and understand more broadly how your
network is configured. We see different
types of attacks, including the ability to
brute force their way into a particular piece
of network equipment by doing what's called
cracking of a password. I'm able to, let's say, take an encrypted version
of that password, break it, figure it out and interpret
what the plain text says and actually log in
to that network device. Exploitive events or
exploitive effects can also include things like exploitation of an
application server. This is where a cyber event basically exploits the
misconfiguration or vulnerability of a particular server-side
operation system or an application
itself like a database. An example of this would
be a SQL injection attack, where a user is
taking advantage of a poorly configured
application, and they're, in essence, tricking
the database and the application to
spit out its contents. We see examples of
SQL injection attacks occur almost every day. Exploitation of data in
transit is our final category. These are cyber
events where data is compromised while in transit. If you're able to
get in the middle of the movement of packets from that point of sale
system, that card reader, and the database
where they're stored and you're able to read
them while they're moving, that's an exploitation
of data in transit. Hopefully what you
start to see here is there's lots of
different ways I can either acquire information from your network or there are
ways that I can disrupt you. Hacking generates these
initial primary effects, which can lead to
additional consequences. A threat actor who has their
own motivations is basically engaging in the hacking process against one or many
machines in your network. When they finally get to
the place they want to be, they take action on target. They're actually
doing something. When they do that, they
generate a cyber event. That cyber event can be
both disruptive in nature. It can fall into any one
of these five categories, or it can be
exploitive in nature, where they're actually
stealing data. Those primary events are all generated by this motivation
that the threat actors have. However, those actions
can also generate secondary impacts on the
human processes they support. So not all cyber
events are the same. Let me give you two different
examples of what I mean. The first is a defacement
of a company website. The second is ransomware on the assembly line in
that same organization. In the first example where
they defaced a website, there's some content
that's modified, files are quickly restored, like it takes about 30 minutes for them to come back online. There's no impact to the
manufacturing capability. The cyber attack is really focused primarily on
that one web server. There really is no significant financial loss for the company because they haven't stopped the ability to make
their product. In the second example where
ransomware is deployed on the actual assembly line on the devices that control
that assembly line, the devices that are
managing that assembly line are made completely
inoperable for 72 hours. Right there you see
a big difference. In the first event, we only had a
30-minute disruption, now we're talking
about 72 hours. But there's no
manufacturing that's able to take place in
this second example. There's significant operational
disruption which leads to large-scale financial
losses while the systems are restored. Customer concerns also start to emerge because of
these supply chains. What are some of the takeaways? Cyber attacks can
generate primary effects. Primary effects are
broadly defined to be disruptive or
exploitive in nature. Categorizing those
primary end effects and understanding
that there can be additional secondary
impacts is useful in assessing the overall severity of one cyber event from another. Next time, we'll talk
about secondary effects. I hope to see you next time.