Hi, Welcome back to
cybersecurity for everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last video, we talked about some
practical examples of real-world hacks that have
occurred and that which highlighted some of the
complexities that we have to deal with in terms of differences
in the threat actors, the hackers we faced
their motives, the tactics that they
use, and the end effects. In this video, I want to
talk a little bit about some of the practical
questions facing policymakers and the
constraints they have to solving some
of those questions. Some of the practical
questions that they have to deal with
are things like, does the government have the right to read
my communications? What if they're part of a criminal investigation versus if it's part of an
intelligence operation, what does that dividing
line look like? What are some of the
authorities that are required? Depending on which country
you're talking about, whether it's the United
States or China, or Russia, or the Central African Republic, they're going to have
different authorities based on their own
governance structures. You need to think about which country you're
dealing with and some of the complications associated
with specific questions. You might have to ask
questions about should governments use specific
cyber tools to engage in certain types of asymmetric
forms of warfare or espionage and how do you enforce such standards where you
might want to draw a line. Where you say that some targets are off-limits versus
some which are not. What regulatory powers
should the government assert to govern critical infrastructure
should it even do so? These are questions
that have to be asked. Is the problem of cybersecurity
simply a private problem, or is it a broader
public problem? How do you make
that determination? How do you differentiate
between the two? These are really, really complicated questions
that have to be asked, and can free speech be
sensored if so, in what cases? Depending on what country
you go to around the world, they're going to have different
answers to that question. The position in the United
States might be really quite different
than what you find in the Russian Federation, which might be actually quite different than what
you find in Germany. We need to ask these questions. But those questions,
that policy space, these broad policy questions
that we hear so much debated in the news
is a constraint. What I mean by constraint is
that unlike when living in a free society where
you're able to do whatever you would like
unless it is illegal. Policymakers face the
opposite problem. You're not actually able to undertake certain
activities unless you are authorized to. This is a fundamental problem. There are some constraints in policy-making simply based on, do you have the right? Does the government
have the right to actually act in this space? Some practical areas or practical constraints
that policymakers may have to deal with
when dealing with the problem of cybersecurity
might include things like, well, what do you actually
mean by a cyber event? That may have a very
specific definition and meaning for a government. Is a website defacement
against a private company, something that the
government even deems to be what they
would call a cyber event. That may be a good question. There might be another
question about jurisdiction. Is this a private
matter, a local issue, a national problem, an
international problem? Who has ownership of this issue? Is it the county government? Is it state government,
federal government, or is it a matter for a
community of nations? Should I cooperate
or not cooperate in cyberspace and there might be a decision calculus for
that and then finally, how do I enforce a particular
point of view on Cyber? If I think that a cybersecurity incident has occurred that is
of public concern, how do I actually enforce
my will on the other side? How do I respond? Do I send a harsh letter, something that we
call a dumb marsh? Do I generate financial
sanctions, travel sanctions? If so, what are the
conditions and against who? How do I potentially engage
in precision strikes? If I think that that makes sense. Or in the most absurd example, do I want to engage in
nuclear retaliation? Probably not likely to occur. But these are fundamental
questions for the policymaker and these are constraints for
policymakers when they went to a dry to address some of those
practical questions. The takeaway here is that
the number of threads, the complexity of the
threats is a problem for the policymaker and they want to levy policymakers remember, their fundamental goal is to leverage technology and
to minimize the risks. In order to understand the
cybersecurity problem, we need to explore
the threat landscape. We need to understand
the internet, how it evolved, how it works. We need to understand
hackers and their motives. We need to understand the
techniques they use and what the process of
hacking actually is. We need to understand the
effects they can engineer. We need to understand the broader attack surface
in which it operates in. Next time, we want to talk about the history and
evolution, the Internet. We're going to deep dive into the first part of the
threat landscape. I hope to see you next time.