Hi, I'm Dr. Charles Harry and this is cybersecurity
for everyone. In this video, I want to talk
about how we move away from a small government-sponsored
program into something that's
more widely accepted. By the late 1960s, ARPANET demonstrated that a distributed and digitized
network was feasible. Remember, ARPANET
was this ability to move packetized data for one part of the
Earth to the next. That had been developed as a general idea in the early part of the 1960s and late1950s. This academic vision was being supported by government
sponsorship, by DARPA, to prove out that there
was in fact a way to enable this radical new
way of communicating. The original vision by
the late 1960s was that only 256 addresses would be
needed on this internetwork. Because remember, at this time, computers were the size
of an entire room. People had a really, really hard time envisioning that all of us one
day would have access to computing power that could fit in the
palm of our hand. How did that change? Well, how did this concept of internetworking
become more popular? That's the story that I
want to explore today. The story of the late 1960s
through the 1970s is about the expanding popularity of networks and new developments
in computing technology. With the success of ARPANET
and the progression of all these new protocols and instructions
and applications, there are new networks
that are being developed, but they tend to be ad hoc, meaning that they're built
with their own set of instructions and their own set of technologies in some cases. By the early 1970s though, a new standardized method for networking has
been invented. This approach called ethernet had been developed at
the Xerox Corporation. Ethernet is one of these foundational technologies
that we still use today. But as standardized way of networking allows a whole
range of incentives by private sector corporations
to develop new technologies and to adopt those technologies as they become
cheaper to implement. By the 1970s, the story becomes one where we're
combining new technologies. We have a new standardized
way of networking. We have the ability to move more computer terminals to be used by private corporations. More companies in
the Fortune 500 are using computer terminals
to do their business. They're moving away purely
from pen and paper. By the latter part of the
1970s into the early 1980s, the development of new
standard personal computers. Things like the Apple 1 and
the Apple 2 are developed and new corporations
like Apple computing and Microsoft are
built on this idea, this new vision, that computing technology will
actually come to the masses. The explosion of networks and
computers create the need for new technologies and new instructions to be
conceived and developed. One good example, there are hundreds that I could cite but I just want to talk about a few. One good example is the ability to have these addresses,
these computer addresses. We talked about
Internet protocol before and we'll
talk about it in more depth in another video. But the idea that we have these very, very
arcane addresses, things like 8.8.8.8, and being able to convert that into
something that's more human friendly like Google. We need a set of
instructions that allow us to do this translation. So we developed
something called the Domain Name System or DNS, which is just simply a set of instructions that say, "Hey, this computer friendly term, 8.8.8.8 is really just Google" Which is a
human-friendly term, this ability to translate. We also needed to
invent ways to route all this packetized
data between networks. Because as we increase the
number of nodes in ARPANET, the different organizations that are connected to one another, we need to have more
efficient ways in which we route that data. We come up with
the term routers. You remember in an
earlier video we talked about this
need for a black box. Well, that's what the routers
end up been created for. To serve as this black
box to route information. In the 1970s up and
through the early 1980s, key technologies and
instructions are written. Scaling the technology enables communities of
interest to develop. As more and more people find the beneficial uses of this internetworking technology
and computer technology, new communities
of interest form. But they are built around
very specific purposes. For example, at the Department
of Energy and in NASA, they created their
own networks to facilitate research and
collaboration around very, very specific topics,
whether it was space exploration or the
use of nuclear technology. By the early 1980s, even the military is utilizing this
technology more wildly. As these new communities
of interest develop, ownership of this inner networking
technology begins to emerge. One of the key decisions made early on was that
there needed to be public availability of all the documents specifying
these instructions. Because if this is
to grow organically, if we are to see this technology
more widely accepted, then people need to understand what the instructions
are so they can build their applications
and their tools to conform with those
standard instructions. This leads to an
acceleration of growth in the adoption of
new technologies. New companies are
formed built around developing technology that implement those
common instructions. But those instructions are developed within a
public community. Remember, the Internet
or internetworking is not owned by a single
organization or government. It is owned by all of
us, the entire planet. It creates this feedback loop of leading to additional
growth and adoption. Because it's open source, it allows people in
a very public way to create the best
possible instructions in a way that's very
open and collaborative. Today, there are dozens, well over 75 working
groups that are working on instructions for the next
generation of technologies, things like autonomous cars, things like smart devices. Those instructions about how those technologies
are developed are being actively debated in
these global communities. In the 1970s through the 1980s, we move from an ARPANET
that consists of just a handful of nodes
in the West Coast of the United States to by
1981 in this graphic, you can see that it now
spans or we have nodes that span across the
entire United States. What did we take
away from today? The private sector helped
drive the growth of the Internet through the development of
scaling technologies, things like ethernet at
the Xerox Corporation. But we also see
during this time, community development
that allows us to accelerate standard adoption. By the early 1980s, multiple purpose-driven networks are now connected together. This is really the foundation of what we know now
as the Internet. In our next video, we're going to talk about how this foundation of
the Internet goes from being something
that's sponsored by DARPA into something
that is privatized, that has transitioned
to be wholly owned by the private sector. I
hope to see you next time.