Hi. Welcome back to
cybersecurity for everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last episode, we talked about
hacking as a process, and the very first phase of that process is reconnaissance. What is reconnaissance? Reconnaissance is, frankly, when the hackers
are in the planning phase. This primarily focus is
around conducting research, and conducting research on an organization can mean
several different things. It can include what
technology is being used, but it can also include things like who actually works
at the organization, the system administrators, as well as the admin assistance, as well as the
corporate leadership. It even includes things like the suppliers and vendors
of an organization. Who do they use to
conduct their payroll? Who do they potentially use to service their heating
and air conditioning? These are all potential
attack vectors into the organization that hackers explore and are all part of the
reconnaissance process. What are some examples
of reconnaissance? Well, maybe identifying
employees on social media, doing research on
Facebook or Instagram, or better yet, LinkedIn. Maybe discovery of
internet-facing computers and what services are
potentially running on them. There are a variety of different freely
available utilities that one can use to identify what computers are on the Internet for a
particular organization. What vendors does the
organization actually use to manage let's say its physical systems like it's heating and
air conditioning? They may have direct access
into the target's network. Even details on the
operating systems and the network
structure of the target. These are all examples
of reconnaissance. What are some techniques? Well, in general, there are
three major techniques. The fist is technical. Technical techniques
might include trying to answer questions like, what public devices can
I see on the Internet? What information
can I glean about their domain name or what services are available on those Internet-facing
devices? Just from gathering
basic information that we know exists
on the Internet, allows us to get a
better understanding of what the attack surfaces and
potential points of access, just exploiting vulnerabilities
in the technology. The second technique is social. Because remember, cyber is not simply about the technology, it's the interplay between
technical and human systems, so understanding
the attack surface specifically as it relates to the humans in your organization is just as important
as the technology. I want to know who works
in that organization. What roles do they play? Who's the system
administrator versus the CEO versus the
Admin Assistant? Can I understand maybe
what drives them, what their motives are, what their hobbies are? Because if I understand
those things, then I can generate different types of
techniques to potentially exploit them and subsequently gain access to your network. I might even be able to find very practical information like what's their email address. That might be really quite
useful if I want to send out a malicious email to all the employees in
your organization, and if I know what
motivates them, what their hobbies are, maybe I can entice them
to actually click on it and allow them to install
my malicious software. So there's a social element to the reconnaissance process. Third, there's an organizational
component to this. I need to broadly
understand what your organization does and what the organizational
units are. Are you primarily broken up into three or four major pieces that are geographically
dispersed? Do I have HR units which are distinct from other parts
of the administration? Who handles your manufacturing? Who deals with the logistics? Because depending on
what my end goals are, whether it's distilled
customer information or distill your
intellectual property, or to create a major disruption, I need to understand what parts of your
organization do what, that is all part of the
reconnaissance process. It might also
include things like, who are your corporate leaders? My guess is that your Chief Executive Officer or your Chief Operating Officer would have a lot of information about the strategic
direction of the company. If I'm engaging in
corporate espionage, I might want to target
them specifically. What units handle customer data? If I'm a criminal
organization and I'm primarily motivated through
a financial motive, how do I actually
know where to go? Well, if I understand
a little bit more about your
organization and who handles customer complaints or deals with questions for your
product, will guess what? Maybe I want to target
the systems they use because they
probably hold a lot of customer data that
I can acquire and eventually sell on the dark web and make some sort of profit. What are some of
the results from all this reconnaissance
that I'm conducting? Well, they might include
things like the listing of all your
Internet-facing devices for the targeted organization, their location on the Internet, so their IP addresses. The services that
are running on them, and the known vulnerabilities
those services have. It might also include lists
of people who I could potentially use as part
of a targeting list; employees, their email, the
positions that they serve, and the social media
accounts that they have. Those are all things
that I can use as a threat actor to potentially gain access to your network. What are some of the takeaways? Again, hacking is a process. It's not any single activity. It is a process which includes lots of different activities
in different groups. The first phase of that
process is reconnaissance. Reconnaissance includes both technical and
non-technical activities that are all part of this
broader planning stage. The results of this
reconnaissance could include things
like a list of devices, their are vulnerabilities, or it could include
things like a list of people and a way of actually connecting to them
through their email or their social media handle. Reconnaissance is the first
phase of the hacking process. In our next episode, we'll talk about
the second phase, Weaponization. I hope
to see you next time.