This is cybersecurity
for everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. We've been talking about
the various effects that threat actors can have when they're
actually on target. In this video, I wanted
specifically talk about what we call
secondary effects. As you might recall, a threat actor has a
potential impact on a system. They can create a variety
of different effects. In the last video, we
discussed primary effects. In this video, I want to
specifically move and talk about secondary effects, specifically the impacts that those threat actors can have
on organizational processes, and the capability to
that particular network. Secondary effects
really are all about the indirect impacts on
the targeted organization. A cyber event can create
indirect impacts to that targeted organization
that stem from those initial effects on the
targeted devices themselves. They can come in a variety
of different forms. Those indirect impacts can come in the form of
revenue effects, where we stopped
the production of goods or the provision
of services. Examples might be something like the ability to create a
disruption to customer orders. We could do that
through, let's say, a distributed denial-of-service
attack on your website. Or we might be able
to directly impact your manufacturing capability by engaging in what's known
as a SCADA attack. We also might be able to talk a little bit about
remediation costs. These are really about
the costs associated with response and remediation
to the specific event, where devices need
to be repaired, or maybe even entirely replaced. Employees might need to
possibly work overtime. Those are all additional
costs that we have to absorb. There's also reputational costs, the loss of confidence
in a company. That could be that a share
price to the company is actually specifically
affected or customer perceptions
about the security of their data might
actually change. Let's talk first
about revenue costs. So revenue costs or revenue
effects are really about stopping the
production of goods or the provision of a
specific service. As we discussed before, that might include things like creating disruptions
to customer orders, like a DDoS have your website or a direct impact to your
manufacturing capability. But let's use the example
of airline flights. It might be that in order
for an aircraft to take off, there are a couple of parts of the organization
that all have to work in tandem in order for
an airplane to take off. There could be an
operational network at the terminal that allows the ticketing agent to scan your booking receipt and
allow you on the aircraft. It could also include a series
of different devices and databases and applications that allow the pilot to
file a flight plan. Then finally, it might also
include network devices that allow aircraft to talk to
not just other aircraft, but also to the
tower themselves. That allows them to take off
and fly with confidence. But remember that if all
three of those work, then you're able to take
off or land your aircraft. Remember though,
that each one of those organizational
processes is underpinned by some set of
interconnected devices. In this case, we
just have a bunch of notional network devices
denoted by X1 through X18. The numbers themselves
don't really mean anything, but it's just to remind you that underneath each one
of these human processes, lie technology that
is interlinked. As long as all three of those
networks function properly, then the aircraft can
take off and land. But what happens if a
cyber attack takes down two key devices in one
of those networks? In that case you
might have one of those operational networks
function but the others fail. The second one fails because the devices themselves
don't work, but the third organizational
process fails because it's reliant
on the second one. You get this cascading
effect that emerges. Devices support
organizational processes and the failure of the
process leads to disruptions to the
organization, generally. These could be tied to
extremely large revenue losses. We've seen examples
of these types of attacks occur over the
last several years. The NotPetya attack, that was a ransomware variant that was spread all around the world, caused billions of
dollars worth of damage, primarily because it
impacted the ability of organizations to produce
products or deliver services. A second effect
that we may want to think about is remediation. Remember, remediation
is really all about the direct costs
for the response or remediation of devices, and the time that it takes for employees to actually
do the work. So we have remediation costs tied to potentially repairing, or replacing specific devices, or for the labor costs
tied to employee work. Organizations will
face questions about the costs of directly
responding to the event. What are the specific cost to repair and replace
impacted devices? If you're only talking
about a single device, that may only be a
few thousand dollars, but if you're talking about
thousands of devices, that cost might be in
the millions of dollars. Where are the specific costs to labor when you have to
respond to the event? Oftentimes, you're
spending quite a bit of money on overtime in order to get those systems and those networks backup
and operational. Finally, there might
even be legal fines and judgments that the
organization will have to pay, and all of these
types of costs are wrapped up in what we
will call remediation. Then finally, there's
reputational costs: the loss of confidence
in your company, and that can manifest itself either through
your share price, where the company's
stock is being sold by a large
number of investors, or even about
customer perceptions about the security
of their data, or the integrity of
their supply chains might start to change. Organizations face these
broader consequences that are above and beyond just the
direct revenue costs, or the remediation costs. They might include things like, do investors sell the
organization's stock? In the aftermath of
the Equifax hack, the stock fell by
over 20 percent. It was a very
significant impact. Will customers
have less faith in the ability of that organization
to protect their data? Will partners seek
new relationships as they believe you are now well protected from cyber events? These are additional
costs that are not directly tied to the primary
effects on the devices, but emerge because
the human factors, the human parts of the
organization, are now impacted. So they're interrelated,
but they are different. We get different attacks that can generate
different effects. The defacement of a
website, for instance, might have relatively
minor primary effects: some content is modified, files are quickly restored
in about 30 minutes, buy customers can order products
for that period of time. There might be some
secondary effects, so the inability of
customers to actually put their orders in might create a small
disruption to revenue, and there might be
some customer concerns about the safety and
security of their data, and maybe they use a competitor. There are revenue and
reputational secondary effects. If we compare that to, let's say, a different
type of attack, where ransomware is deployed
on an assembly line, the primary effects
are quite large. Devices controlling the
manufacturing line are made completely
inoperable for 72 hours, and there's no manufacturing
that's able to take place. The secondary effects, again, could also be quite large. You now have the inability to manufacture goods for 72 hours, and there's lost revenue
associated with that deficiency. It's also going to
take maybe a week to clean up and install
all the new equipment, so the remediation costs are
really quite significant, and the overall share
price might plummet, because you're down
for three days. In this case, we have two
different cyber events. One is a defacement
of a website, the others ransomware
on the assembly line, and there are
differences in effects. Hacking generates
initial primary effects, which then lead to these
additional consequences. The hacker, who remember
is motivated by some goal, engages in the hacking process, which leads to
actions on target. That action on target
creates a cyber event, and that's cyber event
has primary effects, which can be both
disruptive or exploitive, and those primary effects then
lead to secondary effects. They can manifest themselves
in the form of revenue loss, remediation costs, or
reputational damage. Some cyber events
can be so large against very specific and critically important
institutions, that they can actually create
larger impacts on society. What are some of the takeaways? Well, first of
all, cyber attacks generate effects
on organizations, and they derive from these initial actions
of the threat actor. Secondary effects
can impact revenue, remediation, or even reputation. Understanding the
interplay between the primary and
secondary effects is key to differentiating
severity of cyber events. Remember, not all cyber
events are the same. In our next episode, we'll talk specifically about the impacts on larger society. I hope to see you next time.