Hi. Welcome back to cyber
security for everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In the last several episodes, we've talked a lot about how
the Internet actually works. In this episode, I want to change the subject a little bit and talk a little bit about
who the hackers actually are, and specifically the threats
they potentially represent. Let's talk a little
bit more about those cyber security threats. Our society is
increasingly reliant on information technology for all sorts of
everyday activities. These include things like banking and our retail services, but also includes things
like transportation, as well as healthcare
systems and many others. The important thing to
remember is that each one of these sectors have
several vulnerabilities in the various
systems they rely on. Those vulnerabilities can
be exploited by hackers. Let's first, instead of
using the word hacker, let's use a much
more formal term. I'm going to use the
term threat actor. The reason we want to talk
about a threat actor is that a cyber attack is orchestrated by a person
or an organization. That person or organization
is motivated by a purpose. It's really important for
us to understand that not all threat actors are
focused on the same things. Some are motivated
by financial gain, others maybe by national
security interests. We need to understand the differences between
those various threat actors. They execute those operations, utilizing available resources
and they leverage tactics, tools, and processes that vary. This is an important
distinction because not all threat actors have
the same level of capability. We need to understand that, if we're to get to the bottom of the real cyber security
challenges that we face. Let's talk a little bit
more about the people and the organizations
behind this hacking. As we discussed,
cyber attacks are executed by specific people who act either
independently or as part of a broader
collective or group. There are lone actors that may train and execute
attacks based on their own internal
motivations or as part in an effort to gain
additional reputation. However, groups of actors
operating as an organization might execute attacks
for financial, political, or even
nationalist purposes. We need to understand the
differences that each one of these threat
actors represent. Let's talk a little bit
more about motivation. Threat actors are motivated to conduct cyber attack for a
variety of different purposes. They include things
like curiosity, even reputation, there
are financial incentives, in some cases,
political activism, terrorist activity and finally, even national security
considerations. It's important to understand
these motivations influence different groups to conduct certain types of attacks
against certain organizations. If we want to understand
the broad set of threats facing things like
critical infrastructure, we need to understand
who the threat actors are and what they're
motivated to achieve. Let's talk a little bit
more about resources. Not all threat actors
have the same level of resources that
they need in order to execute a specific
type of cyber attack. The ability of threat
actors to execute effects is constrained
by certain things. First, they're constrained
by their own skill level. Are these threat actors? Have they been
practicing for years? Have they been trained by
a government organization, or are they learning their
skills simply on YouTube? It matters. Second, the tools
that they're using matter. Are these tools that have been developed by others
that people are commonly using
around the world and therefore they're
known by defenders, that might limit
their effectiveness, or are the tools custom made? Are they leveraging
capabilities and techniques that no one
has ever seen before? The processes and techniques that threat actors use
are really important. Are they well known by
defenders or are they novel? Then finally, the
financial resources that they can bring to bear matter. If you're a threat
actor and you're interested in attacking a piece of critical
infrastructure, let's call it a
natural gas pipeline, there are very specific
technologies that are leveraged in those
types of systems. If you're a threat actor and you want to attack those systems, you're likely having to go out and purchase those systems, gain access to those systems, and then they're not
necessarily cheap, they may run several
hundred thousand dollars. If you're living in
your parents' basement, chances are you're
not going to have a couple hundred
thousand dollars lying around in order for you to actually mess
around and identify the exploitation potential
in that particular system. Here's an example in the banking sector or
a handful of examples. First, there were
Iranian attacks against 46 major financial
institutions in 2011. We've also seen attacks by a North Korean hacking
group that led to the compromise of
a $100 million out of Bangladeshi Central
Bank accounts in 2015. But it's not simply about attacks against the
financial sector. We also see attacks
in the energy sector. Examples might include power
disruptions in the Ukraine, denial of service
attacks against customer service phone
lines in Detroit, Michigan, and even compromise of data residing on electric
utility computers in Vermont. We also see several attacks coming against the
retail sector. Examples include access to specific point of sale systems. These are the systems in which
you take your credit card and you hand it to the cashier
and they swipe it for you. Attacks against those
particular components happen with a
regular occurrence. These include compromise of credit card numbers
at Home Depot, Target, Eddie Bauer,
and several more. Finally, denial of
service attacks against retail websites are
actually quite common. Even the transportation sector has seen a whole host
of cyber attacks. These include things
like destruction of the cargo management
system at Maersk Lines, the largest container ship
company in the world. We've seen attacks against ticketing kiosk for the
San Francisco Muni system, and even rail systems itself
compromised in the Ukraine. Finally, even
government is affected. Examples of cyber attacks
include things like billing and record
management systems disrupted in Baltimore. We've seen court docket systems completely disrupted in
the city of Atlanta. Even US government
employee records compromised at the Office
of Personnel Management. Well, the United States suspects hackers in China
are responsible for a government data breach that impacted about four
million people's records. It's described as one of the largest thefts of
government data ever seen. The FBI first detected a breach in April at the Office
of Personnel Management, which functions as the federal government's human
resource department, managing background checks, pension payments,
and job training. China denies being responsible. What are some of the takeaways? Well, cyber attacks
are conducted by individuals either acting alone or as part of a larger group. But it's specifically to achieve a goal and that's a really
important point to understand. They leverage tools, techniques, and processes to achieve
those end goals. Finally, they're constrained. They're constrained
by the lack of resources, tools, and skill. Now, all of this together
is fundamentally important because some threat actors
are more capable than others. As we go through the
next few episodes, we'll talk a lot about
the different types of threat actors and the
constraints that they face. I hope to see you next time