Hi. Welcome back to
Cybersecurity for Everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last episode, we talked about
criminal organizations. In this episode,
I want to switch our conversation to
a different type of threat actor, the hacktivists. As a reminder, cybersecurity concerns around a variety
different threat actors. Threat actors leverage
vulnerabilities and they're exploited by those hackers either
acting alone or as part of a broader
collective organization. They absolute leverage their skill and resources to achieve a specific end effect and they're motivated
by different things. Who are the hacktivists? You might be curious about
the term hacktivists. Well, they're really
hacktivists who use hacking to achieve a
particular set of objectives. There are often focused
on a set of political, economic, or even
social concerns. Their skill level
really does vary. For the most part
hacktivists tend to use low-level capabilities like website defacement and
denial-of-service attacks. They tend to act either independently or as part
of a broader collective. They use an awful lot of off-the-shelf
capability and then targets may include
not just governments, but also corporations and
even specific individuals. This is really important. They're not aligned with anyone's specific ideology
or even government. We see hacktivists that
are hacking on behalf of a specific government acting in more of a
nationalist's point of view, as well as hacktivists
that are more focused on a specific idea, concepts of ecological
conservation, for instance, would
be one example. Let's talk specifically
about their motives. In some cases,
hacktivists will engage in hacking activity out of
social justice concerns. Maybe there's a particular
issue that's affecting a particular community
and they're upset by it. They'll engage in hacking
activity, defacements, denial-of-service attacks, to emphasize their displeasure
at that particular issue. They may also take
action concerning political actions taken
by specific governments, ones that are specifically counter to the
hacktivist agenda. One example might be
something along the lines of governments who are engaging
in free trade agreements. There might be a hacktivist organization who
thinks that that's a terrible idea as it leads
to exploitation of labor. Therefore, they engage in a hacking campaign to
voice their displeasure. But it could also include things like
environmental concerns. If there are concerns that specific corporations
are not taking the issue of climate change seriously and are concerned about
their carbon footprint. You might actually see hacktivists engaging
in hacking activity. This is a different set of
motives than what we've seen with criminal
actors and hobbyists. Let's talk a little
bit about their tools. Just like with hobbyists, hacktivists tend to use a lot of the standard tool set that we find in the
Kali Linux built. They use a lot of
standard tools for reconnaissance as well as for exploitation
of those devices. Even further, basic tactics
and tools for delivery. They're using standard
capabilities. That's an important
differentiator from criminal organizations
or even nation-states. What attacks do we normally
see with hacktivists? Well, we oftentimes see
available information disclosed and oftentimes
that information is actually publicly available. They'll do research,
for instance, on particular individuals and publish things like
their address, or their phone number, or maybe pictures that are found on their
social media account. Nothing that's really
terribly sophisticated. Sometimes they will
gain access to specific accounts and also publish information that
is not publicly available. We oftentimes see hacktivists
engaged in defacements, graffiti on a website and we also see
denial-of-service attacks. These three broad level of effects are typically what we see with
hacktivists' campaigns, exposure of information,
defacement of websites, and
denial-of-service attacks. Let's take one example of a hacktivist
collective, Anonymous. Anonymous is a
hacktivist collective, basically comprising
of individual hackers that are loosely aligned
around a particular worldview. Remember, these are not
individuals that work for a government or a
criminal organization. They are individuals who believe very strongly in a
particular set of issues, it could be a social
justice issue, it could be economic issue
or environmental issue. They focused their
hacking activity by loosely surrounding it around
something like a campaign. They focus on a particular issue like countering the
terrorist narrative. They organize their
activity around campaigns. An example might be a hacktivist organization that wants to counter a
terrorist narrative. They would organize
themselves and their activities around
countering that narrative. They primarily focus on things
like identity exposure, website defacements, and
denial-of-service attacks. If anonymous, for instance, had concerns around, let's say, a terrorist
organization like ISIS, they may focus on
trying to identify ISIS members and publicizing
their identities. That would be an example of an effect that
anonymous would have. It is so very
specific examples of these campaigns would be
things like operation KKK, which was focused around exposing members of
the Ku Klux Klan. They also focus their aims in some occasions against
specific governments. In this particular case, OP Saudi was a set of operations
specifically targeting the Saudi government
and engaged in website defacements and in
denial-of-service attacks. Some examples of infamous
hacktivist groups would include, of
course, Anonymous, Chaos Computer Club,
Legion of Doom, Masters of Deception,
and Lizard Squad. They really liked these names
and hacking organizations, tend to like their
creative names. When we take a look at the broad set of facts that
hacktivists are having. They're primarily looking
to make a statement. We see attacks going against primarily things like government websites
and organizations, but it also includes professional and
scientific organizations and even the finance and
insurance community. Hacktivists are primarily
interested in a broad set of social issues that include
things like social justice, but also include issues like the environment or economics. It's difficult to
group all hacktivists into the same set
of individuals. What are the takeaways? Hacktivists have a
range of skills, but they primarily focus on
these low-level capabilities; website defacements,
denial-of-service attacks, and exposure of identities. They are motivated by political, social, and
environmental issues. They tend to focus on relatively
easy things to execute. They primarily focus on
exposing information, defacing websites, and a
denial-of-service attack. They're really not bound
by any single ideology. In our next episode, we're going to talk about advanced persistent threats
and the real challenge that they present to broader society. I hope to see you next time.