[MUSIC] Hi, welcome back to cyber security for everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last episode we
talked about activists. And in this episode, I want to talk
about a different type of threat actor. The advanced persistent threat. Now recall that threat
actors take advantage of specific vulnerability in systems. They leveraged their skill and resources
to achieve very specific end effects and they are motivated by different things. So who are the advanced
persistent threats? And specifically we may
want to ask ourselves, why do we call it an advanced
persistent threat? On a very high level they are advanced. These are the pros these
are the big leagues of hacking. They're persistent in the sense that they
persistently engaged with their targets. They're relentless. If there is an objective to be had,
they're going to persistently engage against that target and
of course they remain a threat. These are highly skilled
hacking organizations. These are not running
the mill basement hackers. These are folks with deep training and
resources. They mostly are tied to nation states or
aligned with their geopolitical goals. So these are folks who are aligned
with specific governments and who have their training and backing. They leverage highly customized tools,
tradecraft and infrastructure. So let's talk a little
bit about their motives. Well, as you might imagine,
there are a variety. Their first motive maybe espionage. They may want to engage in
stealing trade secrets or classified information or
even highly relevant policy information ahead of in the lead up to a very
large international conference. They may engage in industrial espionage. There might be a real interest in stealing
very specific corporations, trade secrets. Things like a secret formula for
producing steel. They may also be interested in
sabotaging competitors operations. Additionally, they may be a general
interest in engaging in sabotage. The ability for one country to engage in
a low intensity conflict against another. All designed to be a set of operations
to achieve a broader set of national objectives. And finally, there may be general
support to military operations. So advanced, persistent threats may help
amplify kinetic military operations. So in addition to flying those bombers and
dropping munitions, we may also engage in hacking activity to do things
like take down an electrical grid. We can also see APTs utilizing their
capabilities to become what we call an asymmetric form of attack
in a response to a stronger power. And so if one country has
a more dominant military, another country who may want to respond in
a kinetic way may not be very successful. However, in cyberspace,
they may be more effective. So they do what's called
an asymmetric attack. So let's talk a little more
about the tools that APTs use. So we see a lot of custom tools. So unlike the hobbyists who
are primarily using Cali Lennox or even the activists who use
a lot of Cali Lennox utilities. Custom tools are the name
of the game here in Apts. Standard and custom tools for
reconnaissance are used. Standard and
custom exploitation techniques. This is important. When we see a lot of
custom techniques used, it's not like APTs have forgotten
a lot of the standard capabilities and in some cases standard
capabilities may work just fine. But we also see a lot of
custom tactics for delivery, to additionally supplement
standard techniques. So the idea here is that APTs will
use everything at their disposal. Not simply the standard tools
that everyone else is using, but they will develop their own and
they develop their own tradecraft. So what kind of attacks would
do we expect to see from an APT. Well we see deep penetrations
into sensitive government and corporate networks and
even their phone systems. We see large scale disruptive
campaigns to cripple critical infrastructure to do things
like take down a power grid. In fact in the case of the Ukraine
we've seen to power events where an APT Operation took down power
on two separate occasions. That's a pretty significant end effect. Finally we may see acquired information
being used as part of a broader disinformation campaign. A lot of the concerns surrounding
the 2016 election in the United States. Centered around the use of
information that was acquired from the Democratic National Committee systems. It was seated with information
that was false and then eventually distributed
in a disinformation campaign. So who are some of these groups? So Fancy Bear, Energetic Bear,
Rocket Kitten, Comic Crew, Lazarus Group are all examples
of APT organizations that are aligned with different nation states. In the case of Fancy and Energetic bear, they tend to be aligned with
the Russian federation. Rocket kitten is associated
with the Iranian. Comic Crew is a chinese organization and Lazarus Group is affiliated
with the north Koreans. So one example, APT 29. Goes by several different Aliases, Cozy Bear, The Duke's Grizzly Steppe and
several more. The attributed country of
origin here is Russia. The Russian federation. And it mostly conducts espionage on
behalf of that Russian federation. The targets mostly include
Western governments and related NGO organizations,
non government organizations. And they tend to focus initially
on kind of a smash and grab, get initial access into the organization
and still as much information as possible. However, if this, if the organization is
sensitive enough or important enough, they have the ability to switch over and
become very stealthy and maintain persistent access in that
organization for quite some time. So some of the national goals that
we see APTs achieving are primarily focused around a couple of key industries. Certainly public administration. We see a lot of APTs attacks
against governments. It makes sense. There's sensitive government information
that those APT may want to obtain. However, in this case, we also see APTs
interested in other types of targets. Telecommunications, Utilities are all
really, really important targets for Apts, especially if they're interested
in fighting some sort of asymmetric war. So what are some of the take aways? Well, first of all,
APTs are highly skilled threat actors. These are the pros. These are the best of the best. They are motivated by
geopolitical concerns. They are tightly aligned with
nation states and their agendas. They're able to conduct complex
cyber attacks that can persist for a long period of time. They focus on stealing information from
governments as well as Corporations. But can also engage in sabotage and
support to military operations. And we find APT hacking
groups all over the world. In our next module, we're going to
explore the process of hacking. We're going to disentangle this term
that is oftentimes thrown around in popular media. I hope to see you next time.