[MUSIC] Hi, welcome back to Cybersecurity for
Everybody. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last video, we tried to demystify
what we mean by cybersecurity. And in this video,
I want to start to define what we mean or what we would term by
the threat landscape. And so specifically, the question that
I want to talk about in this video is, when we talk about cyber
as a security problem, what is it that we're
actually talking about? Let's kind of drill
into this a little bit. So we call this the threat landscape. And it's really about trying to
put cybersecurity in context. And what we mean by that is that there
are a variety of different options or concepts that we need
to address if we want to get a better handle on
cybersecurity as a problem set. So that might include
things like the Internet, hackers, tactics, effects, and
something we call the attack surface. The Internet might include
things like the protocols and physical structures to move information
from one point of the earth to the next. It might include the motivations and
skill levels of hackers. Not all hackers are of equal skill,
so we need to talk about that and some of the important differences
between those various groups. We need to talk about what
we actually mean by hacking. What are the tactics, what
are the processes that hackers have to use in order to compromise information or
to create a disruption? We need to talk about
the effects they can achieve. Are we only talking about
data that's compromised? Are we talking about the ability for
hackers to turn off, let's say, the power in a particular
area of the world? We need talk about that and
how to classify that. And then, finally, we need to talk
about the broader, what we would call, attack surface. The interplay between physical and human systems that create the areas of
opportunity for hackers to exploit. This is what we would call
the threat landscape. So let's talk about at a very high level,
the first one of these, the Internet. So what are the topics that we need
to discuss in order to get a better handle on basically the field of play for
hackers and defenders? Well, this would include,
of course, devices, your laptops, your phones, but
it also includes even some of the sensors, things like your Alexa devices or
your Google Home smart devices. But it also includes things
like physical infrastructure. It includes things like fiber optic
networks, it includes microwave networks, it includes routers and switches. How do we actually understand
the security vulnerabilities associated with the physical devices? So we're going to have to talk about that. It also includes logical structures,
the instructions, the way in which information
is actually routed. How do we actually make determinations
that information should go to this particular network
instead of another? So we need to talk about that. It also includes things like applications. So cybersecurity's not
simply about the networks, it's not simply about the hardware itself,
but it's also very specifically
about the applications we use. And then, finally,
we need to talk about governance. What are the rules of the road? Is this pure anarchy and everyone kind
of makes up the rules as they go? Are nation states the ones that
are actually responsible for writing those rules, or
is it something different? So we'll talk about that. So when it comes to hacking,
though, the hacking is done by specific individuals, or
by organizations of individuals. And we oftentimes use the term hackers. Sometimes we use the term threat actors,
and we'll talk about that in more
depth in a different video. But the important thing
to remember here is that hackers have different motivations
as well as skill levels. So in some cases, hackers may
simply be motivated by curiosity. They're just insanely curious
about how technology works and how to potentially prove
that out on the Internet. But there are other types of hackers
that may want to actually promote a specific social or political agenda. Others may actually
have financial motives. They may want to try to steal information
to sell on the dark web to make money. Or they may actually leverage their access in a particular bank
to illicitly transfer funds. Or finally, the hackers may have
political or military objectives. They may be affiliated with
a large nation state or a small nation state who are interested
in understanding the motives of another. And then, finally, the skill level or
sophistication of the actors varies. Not all hackers have the same ability. Oftentimes in popular media,
you go to a movie and you see, what? Someone sitting in their
parent's basement who is able to take down an entire electrical grid, or they're manipulating the traffic
signals in a large metropolitan area. It doesn't really work that way. While yes, there are some hackers and
hacking groups that do have certain skills that allow them to engage in that
type of highly disruptive activity, the vast majority do not. So regarding various skill levels, we need to think about
the various skills of hobbyists, of activists, criminal organizations,
as well as nation states. This is an important differentiator. James Clapper, who's the former director
of National Intelligence, said, in testimony on Capitol Hill that there
are a variety of different threats that the United States face. And these threats come from
different hacking groups. But specifically, the thing to take away
here is that he notes that hacking and the effects of hacking have increased
in size, scale and severity. And we're seeing everything from highly
disruptive attacks to exploitive attacks, defacements, attacks on point of sales
systems used in retail organizations. Those are the things that you
swipe your credit cards with. Denial of service attacks,
attacks on control systems that are used to do things like manage your power and
water systems. But there are a range of actors and
methods of attack and targets that are all used. We see these attacks occurring in
the commercial space as well as personal networks and government networks. We see hacktivists, advanced persistent
threats, or what we call APTs, criminal and hobbyist groups, all alike, attacking a variety of different
targets with different end effects. And specifically, he notes that there is
not likely to be what is oftentimes thrown in popular culture, a cyber Armageddon. Or sometimes we use the term
cyber Pearl Harbor. And that's probably not going to happen. There's not going to be a single event
that takes down the entire Internet. That's something that we tend to
hear oftentimes in the movies, but that's probably not true. So what we are more likely to see
are several nations around the world engaging in very targeted,
and in some cases, very sophisticated attacks,
that can have a variety of effects. And so we, either as consumers, or
policy analysts, or corporate executives, or part of a leadership team,
need to have a much more nuanced and sophisticated understanding of
what threats are out there. Who is conducting them and ways in which we might be able to
build resilience in our systems. Both the technical systems as
well as our human systems. And that's really one of the fundamental
learning objectives of this entire course. So in addition to the hackers and
the effects that they want to engineer, the threat landscape also includes
the tactics, techniques and procedures, what we call TTPs. And these tactics can include a variety
of different terms that maybe you've actually heard of when you've
read a news article about a cyber event. They include things like phishing, where I'm sending you that illicit email
with the hope that you click on a link. And when you click on that link that
allows me as the hacker maybe to engage in some sort of nefarious activity. So that email that you get
from the Nigerian prince isn't really from a Nigerian prince. But it can also include
things like ransomware, where I encrypt your hard drive
on your particular computer and I demand payment in order for
me to send you the key that unlocks it. It might also include something that
we call a distributed denial service, where now your computer or your web
application server is that much slower or doesn't work all together. It can include other terms like privilege
escalation, infrastructure, virus, Trojan. It might also include malware-less
attacks, where attackers are not actually including particular programs
to run on the disk of your computer. They're using what we would call
a variety of different scripts, like PowerShell and batch scripting. And then, finally, there might be
attacks on critical infrastructure, what we would call industrial
control systems, ICS attacks. So when we discuss threat landscape and
what we mean by hacking and the tools and techniques, we'll talk
about these terms in more depth. Finally, after those tactics
by hackers have been employed, they're engineering some sort of effect. That is the goal the hacker. The hacker is not simply interested
in moving around your network. The hacker actually wants to
achieve some sort of goal. So we need to talk about in
a much more sophisticated way, the effects that they seek to engineer. Because there's a variety of different
effects that they can achieve, everything from stealing information, to manipulating
control systems, to demanding payment. And so when we in fact take a look at
a lot of the various cyber events that are occurring, things like attacks
against the transportation networks in San Francisco, or
attacks on the electrical grid in Ukraine, or industrial attacks in Germany or
Iran or in the United Arab Emirates, there are a variety of different effects. So we need to talk and understand and
have a more sophisticated language for understanding about
hacker-induced effects. We also need to talk about how the costs,
the impacts, can be measured. Because oftentimes in this space,
we use a variety of different terms and we don't have a consistent
way of measuring severity. Because not all cyber attacks
are frankly a public concern. Are you really concerned about
an attack on a retail giant? Well, you might be if your
data was compromised. But does that mean that
the White House should be involved? Maybe, maybe not. What if your favorite local restaurant
has its network compromised and it's taken down for two weeks? Should the White House be involved? Should the United Nations be
concerned about that issue? Should other countries be
concerned about that issue? Probably not. So how do we make a determination? Well, that really boils down to,
what are the costs? How do I measure it? And how do I actually make a determination
of whether this is a private problem or a public concern? So these effects can be certainly measured
in a variety of different way, and they can be categorized in
a variety of different ways. And a lot of individuals, the technologists who are charged with
actually protecting these networks, need to actually be thinking about
the end effects that are of most concern. In a fairly recent SANS survey,
going back to 2017, what we see here is that
the respondents in this particular case ranked order the effects that
they're most concerned about. So it's not that they're just
concerned about hackers and hacking, they're actually
concerned about very specific effects that can be
engineered against their network. And this very simple chart references
a variety of different effects that they have often seen. So in some cases, they noticed that most
effects are in fact quite a nuisance, they're much more of a nuisance
rather than a real impact. But they are concerned
about system damage. They are concerned about other
types of data being compromised, so understanding effects is critical. And then, finally, we have to be
worried about the attack surface. Because our individual networks,
our organizational networks, and our government networks
are interdependent and complex. It is a mix of business and personal
devices working together with a variety of different services,
many of which are globally distributed. How do we protect all of that? How do we protect the data in transit? How do we protect the data that's resident
in any one of those data repositories? And whose laws actually matter? Whose laws carry weight? If I'm sitting in the state of
Maryland using a service that is hosted in Texas and
there's a compromise to that particular business's network in Texas,
whose laws apply? State of Maryland, state of Texas? What if they're different? What if they have different thresholds for
what needs to be reported? Does that matter? Let's make it more complicated. What if that business operates in Ireland? Do they need to follow Irish law,
US law, Texas law, Maryland law? So the Internet is a story of complexity,
interdependence is globally distributed. Are your defenses optimized? And so these are some of the fundamental
questions we need to address in this course. And then, finally, we have to
attribute the attacks to individuals. Attribution, or the ability to identify
who is actually responsible for the hacking activity,
is really complicated. They use proxy infrastructure, the ability
to use other devices to make it look like it's coming from somewhere else. So if the hacker is operating in Houston,
Texas, they're actually rerouting all their
communications through Romania. They use cutout identities, or the ability
to use fake IDs, fake individual names, addresses, phone numbers,
it makes it more complicated. And so law enforcement has a really
difficult time trying to understand not only the tools that are being
used to conduct the hack but also from where to hide. So in this video, what we've covered
is trying to not simply demystify what we mean by cybersecurity, but start to
define the broader threat landscape. The Internet and how information
traverse is, the threat actors and motivations, the tools and
tradecraft that hackers use. We take a look at the effects
that they achieve. And finally, the broader attack surface. In future videos, we'll delve deeply
into each one of these areas. I hope to see you next time.