Hi, welcome back to
cybersecurity for everyone, I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last episode we
talked about the origins of the World Wide Web and the development of the
early browser technologies. In this episode I want to talk about how that technology
has been further developed over the
last 20 years and why that matters
for cybersecurity. The commercialization of
the World Wide Web in the 1990s led to eventually the first tech
bubble burst in 2000. But there's a growing user base of the World Wide
Web, and certainly new technologies are driving the growth of that user
base in the early aughts. We see the development and introduction of
home Wi-Fi routers. We see monetization of
advertisements by Google, and so the monetization
of search becomes incredibly important driver of the development of a user
base for the Internet. Something called Web
2.0 starts to emerge. In the early 1990s and
through most of that decade, Web content with static. We're very used to now
being able to book a car online or a hotel or buy an airplane ticket to fly
anywhere around the world. We're used to being able to
pay all of our bills online. But in the early days
of the World Wide Web, most of the information
was static, meaning you couldn't
interact with the content. It was really, really
useful if you wanted to get information about a
particular product or service. But if you actually
wanted to do something, it wasn't very helpful. What we see is by 2004, more interactive content
starts to emerge. Blogs and wikis and some of the early social networking
sites start to come online. So lot more interaction
with users, a lot more content actually
being built online. Web 2.0 really marks this acceleration of
daily usage by consumers. Instead of the World
Wide Web simply being in a bunch of billboards
or advertisements, it is now becoming
much more ingrained in day-to-day use by consumers,
by ordinary people. Growth in user interactions
by companies such as MySpace, Amazon,
Facebook, Friendster. Many of you probably have never heard of Friendster
but it was one of these early social
networking sites. This greater demand dries
really two important trends, cloud and mobile computing. Let's talk about the first
trend, Cloud computing. In their early
days of computing, computers were really
big and expensive. They filled entire rooms, people really
couldn't afford them. But as technology became more affordable and the technology of miniaturization
and miniaturization of computing technology
takes holds, those computers become
much more portable and they are more usable
by folks at home. Businesses and consumers start
buying their own computers instead of leasing or
renting computing time, and yet while most
people have access to computers in their homes
and in their businesses, the really big and
expensive computers still remain out of reach. While the systems
have been around, the movement back to
shared resources, the ability for consumers or
businesses to gain access to those really powerful machines
starts to make a comeback in the early aughts or in the middle aughts under
the name the Cloud. Really all we're talking about, we'll talk more specifically about Cloud technology
in another episode, what I want to
highlight here is that there are some really
expensive machines that have really significant
capabilities where people want to be able to leverage that for some
particular purpose. We've now renamed that
concept the Cloud. Amazon in 2006 develops
a suite of tools that allows users to access these really
powerful systems. Now we see a whole suite
of other companies that are engaged in similar
Cloud technologies. Amazon Web Services
or what we call AWS, Azure which is a Microsoft
product, Google Cloud, etc, are all examples of Cloud
systems that basically are allowing users to gain access to these really
powerful systems, and not have to buy it
themselves, it's all it is. But there's also a second
trend, mobile computing. A mobile web technology has its origins in
the late 1990s, and frankly it seem even maybe a little bit
earlier than that. But mobile networks
in the 1990s, in the early 2000s are just
not fast enough to be able to quickly download or upload
data on the World Wide Web, that begins to change. By the end of the aughts, faster third-generation
or what we call 3G technology allows
for greater speeds. By the end of the
decade, in July 2007, Apple introduces the iPhone, an absolute revolution
in mobile computing. By this last decade, we are creating a
network society and we're seeing
growing connectivity, home Wi-Fi systems that allow for you to connect
your Roomba with your smart light bulbs as well as your laptops
and your mobile devices. We're seeing a broader set of social connections
and expression, social networks like
Facebook, blogs, Wikis, and other communities
that people are interacting with on
a regular basis. Then of course we're seeing supporting utilities
and sensors. We're seeing the liquidus
adoption of Cloud Computing. We're seeing the
development of what are called the
Internet of Things. All these devices in your home and in businesses that are
connected to the Internet. By the end of the 2010s, modern societies
leveraging the Internet as a global comments. In this decade,
where are we going? We're seeing the increasingly
use of advanced analytics, things like machine learning
and artificial intelligence. We're seeing the introduction of autonomous vehicles and
smart road infrastructure, and of course we're seeing
the rise of smart cities and network critical
infrastructure is becoming much more prevalent and who knows what this decade is
going to give us in addition. All of this together is
painting the picture of the Internet becoming
not simply as a tool, not simply as a utility, but actually part
of modern society. It's part of the fabric of our institutions and
our society at large. Why are we even
talking about this, this is cybersecurity course. Why are we talking
about the history? Because the history
is important if you want to understand
vulnerabilities. Because remember, the Internet
was conceived, built, scaled, and commercialized by
academics, the government, and the private sector, and a lot of that
technology is kind of old, 40-50 years old in fact. Lot of the basic
foundational concepts of the Internet were developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Some of that technology that was developed 40 or 50 years ago includes vulnerabilities that
still stay with us today. When you couple those
vulnerabilities with complexities in the interconnections
of billions of devices and billions of people
around the world, it creates a recipe for potentially very large-scale
public concerns. What can we take away
from this episode? First, what we start to see in the early aughts is
the movement away from purely static
content that we see in the 1990s to something that's
much more interactive. We also see the drive of Cloud and mobile
technology in that decade, and in the last decade, we've seen the adoption
of Internet technology as not only simply
a tool or utility, but really at the core
of modern society. In our next episode, we're going to explore
how data actually moves from one point of
the earth to another. This becomes
fundamentally important when we want to
understand hacking and how those vulnerabilities in these various protocols
can be exploited. I hope to see you next time.