Hi. Welcome back to
cybersecurity for everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. We've been talking a lot
about threat actors. Remember, threat
actors are using vulnerabilities to
exploit and achieve an end effect against a
particular organization and they can act either alone or as
part of a broader collective. They leveraged their skill
and resources to achieve a specific end effect and they're motivated
by different things. In our last episode, we talked about hobbyists
but in this episode, I want to turn our attention to criminal organizations.
Who are they? They can be low-level. These criminal
organizations could be low-level criminals
utilizing very, very basic techniques, or they could be highly
skilled hackers. They can also be
highly resourced. This is a big difference between the hobbyist and
the criminal enterprises. Some of these criminal
organizations are incredibly well-financed. They can use both
off-the-shelf capabilities, like what we find in Kali Linux build but they can also
develop their own tools. They are likely to
engage in activity that results in them earning
some level of return. That is their
primary motivation. We'll talk about that
more in a second. They can act alone or as part of a broader criminal
organization and they might actually
have connections to government and
security organizations. This is a real
differentiator between hobbyists and criminal
organizations. Some criminal enterprises act
in somewhat of a gray zone. They have connections back to their home governments or security organizations
and it makes it very challenging to do both the attribution and frankly to bring
them to justice. It's for that reason that the Federal Bureau
of Investigation spends a lot of time and resources trying to identify and apprehend criminal
organizations and individuals. Let's talk a little bit
more about their motives. Whilst many of us would guess, criminal organizations
are primarily motivated to conduct cyber
attacks for financial gain. They can use a variety
of techniques and tactics to engage
in online fraud, extortion, or outright theft. In fact, international
corporate spies or criminal organizations
conduct industrial espionage, the stealing of
corporate secrets. What kind of tools do the
criminal organizations potentially use to
conduct these attacks? Well, just like
with the hobbyists, they use Kali Linux
in some cases, a lot of those
off-the-shelf capabilities. Especially for things like
conducting reconnaissance, a lot of those
off-the-shelf capabilities are really quite useful. However, they also build their own tools
for exploitation. Yes, they may use things that
are fairly standardized, but they would also potentially
utilize their own tools. They also may use their own custom tools
and tactics for delivery. In fact, we see a lot of criminal organizations
spending quite a bit of time and effort developing new tradecraft for achieving these
broader end effects. What kind of attacks
do we potentially sees criminal
organizations conducting? No. We absolutely see criminal organizations encrypting data and
demanding money. We call this ransomware and we've seen plenty
of examples of that occurring all around the
world specifically here in the United States against a lot of different
municipal networks. We also see criminal
organizations conducting
denial-of-service attacks, overwhelming web servers,
and less money is paid. We absolutely see SQL
injection attacks being orchestrated by
criminal organizations. We also see them
guessing passwords, doing those brute
force attacks as a way to gain access into
a particular organization, and using that as a
way to potentially move further into
those organizations. We absolutely see the
elicit access to point of sale systems as a way to covertly steal
credit card numbers. These are just a
handful of examples. There are many others, but there are a variety of
different techniques and tactics that are leveraged by criminal organizations to
achieve their end goals. One example is the
Target Corporation. Back in 2013, the Target Corporation had a
significant data compromise. Now, in this
particular compromise, over 70 million credit card
numbers were actually taken. The threat actor behind this particular
compromise was able to gain access to the
Target corporate network through a third-party vendor, actually part of their heating and air conditioning vendor. They gained access to
point-of-sale systems across multiple stores and once they had access to those
point-of-sale systems, covertly stole
credit card numbers from millions of
American consumers. They were able to
do so because they were able to install a piece of custom software known as BlackPOS on all of
those various devices. Over the course of many months, they were able to compromise those 70 million credit card
numbers. Pretty impressive. Who are some of these
criminal hacking groups? Well, cybercriminals
are found all over the world and this is just
a handful of examples, they include really
colorful names like Wolf Spider and
Skeleton Spider. One of the things you'll
notice in this industry is, and when we talk
about threat actors, we tend to give them
colorful names. But the important thing is that cybercriminal organizations
vary in skill, the tools used, the
effects that they achieve, and the relationship with
their home government. Not all criminal groups
have equal skill. Bottom line is, criminal organizations are
looking to make a profit. When we take a look at what cyber events are achieved
by criminal organizations, they really do vary across a
number of different sectors. Yes, we still see significant attacks going
against professional services, those dentist office,
and the accountants. But we also see significant
attacks in the retail sector, a hotel and hospitality. The goal there is to
gain access to data that they can later
sell and make a profit, or in the case where we see
ransomware attacks encrypting that data and demanding a
payment before it's released. What can we take away from
this particular episode? Well, first of all,
criminal organizations tend to be higher
skilled than hobbyists. They are primarily motivated
by financial gain. They oftentimes
use custom tools, which makes them
very different than what we see with hobbyists. They focus on a variety
of fraud, theft, and extortion tactics
in order to make money. They're found all over
the world with some being tied closely with
their home governments. In our next episode, we're going to walk
through a case study. We're going to talk about a particular extortion event that occurred in San Francisco. I hope to see you next time.