Hi, welcome back. This is cybersecurity for everyone and I'm
Dr. Charles Harry. Our last video we talked
about the threat landscape, and today I want to talk about the challenge for
policymakers in this space. The problem with the threat landscape,as we
discussed last time, is that in addition
to trying to resolve some of the specific technical vulnerabilities
in the Internet. We have to deal with the hackers, their process, techniques, affects, as well as the
complexity of the attack surface. The fundamental problem for the policymaker is that
we first of all have a wide range of targets that are available for the
hackers to go after. There's some
fundamental questions that the policymakers
need to ask themselves, things like should the
government provide greater regulatory oversight on specific industry sectors? Does the entertainment
sector bear more regulatory oversight
versus the electrical grid? Well, people are probably say no with that particular issue, but we have to ask
ourselves this question for every sector we want to discuss. But in addition to targets, there are range of actors. We have hobbyists, we have
what are called hacktivist, people that are hacking for some social or political
agenda as well as a variety of nation-states and criminal
syndicates that are potentially going after
a variety of targets. We need to figure
out what types of penalty should we enact for a variety of
different actors. Should we enact
different penalties for each one of these actors? Is there an international
standard that is required to attributing an
attack to a specific country? If so, is that become a de factor red-line
for when one country decides that they're able to respond in kind to
another country? These are good questions
that policymakers have to ask themselves and
then need to be addressed. But in addition to the actors, there's a range of
attack vectors. There's lots of different ways that I as a hacker
can come after you. I can utilize yes
phishing attacks, but there are a range
of other techniques that one might be able to use. So understanding how
the various networks can be attacked is important. For a government, I
need to ask myself, what are the types of technical vulnerabilities
that I want to make sure that the majority of
particular industries in my economy need to be aware of? Should I make them aware of it? If I have an intelligence
apparatus who works for me, and they discover a
new vulnerability in a particular critical
infrastructure system. Should they be forced to actually disclose that
particular vulnerability? Or do I want to keep it for myself to use to
gather information? These are fundamental questions
that have to be asked. There's a diverse set
of attack surfaces. Remember, what we're
fundamentally talking about here is a confluence
between technical, human, and organizational
systems together, and where they meet the
so-called seams between these three different domains are potential areas which
hackers can exploit. We also have to deal with a diverse set of attack surfaces. Because remember
what we're talking about is the confluence between human organizational and
human systems together, and in some cases the
government may want to require certain companies to
have a greater level of insight into let's say
who their vendors are. If we're talking about
an electrical provider, we may want them to have a better sense of
understanding who's providing their hardware and software into those
critical systems. Governments need to figure out what the right level
of interaction is for a variety of different operators in
specific industries. Because what might be
permissible and maybe even warranted or wanted in let's
say an electrical provider, may not be the same case for someone in the retail sector. So we need to think more broadly about what is the role of
government in this space. Then finally, we need to
think about complex effects. We need to understand
that the effects that hackers can have in one part of your network might
cascade to other parts of your network or to other
organizations entirely. How do we manage that? How do we manage the impacts on one particular
organization cascading through the rest of
an industrial sector? If I take down part of a port facility in a particular location
in the United States, that will have
logistics effects to other organizations that leverage that port facility to ship
their goods and services. I need to understand
that. How do I model it? How do I manage that complexity? The threat landscape
challenge for the government and
for policymakers but also frankly for
organizational leaders of all [inaudible] , require us to understand
that the range of actors, the range of targets,
vectors of attack, the attack surfaces and complex
effects coming together, and there are a range of
questions we need to address. Now that we've talked about the fundamental challenge
of the threat landscape, let's explore some examples. In our next video,
we'll take a look at four specific examples
that have occurred, and we'll talk about some of the nuances. See you next time.