Hi. Welcome back to
Cybersecurity for Everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last episode we
talked about threat actors. Just to review, threat actors
exploit vulnerabilities and those threat actors
act either alone or as part of a collective or
broader organization. They leverage their skill and resources to achieve a
specific end effect. Finally, they're motivated
by different things. Not all threat
actors are the same. In this episode, I
want to talk about the first one of those
groups, hobbyists. Let's talk about the first one of these groups, hobbyists. Who are they? They tend
to be low-skilled. If you're acting alone and
you don't have a lot of financial resources and/or
a lot of formal training, you're not going to have
the top flight skills necessary to pull off the most complicated
cyber operation. They tend to be
lightly resourced. Especially if you think of the typical example
that's given by a hacker, may be a brilliant person living in their
parents basement, they live in their
parents basement. They probably don't
have a lot of money. They don't have a lot of money, they may not be able to
acquire the software or the hardware for them
to reverse engineer and to pull off some of the more complicated
cyber operations. They tend to use
off the shelf tools that have usually been
developed by other individuals. They're likely to engage
in some activities that demonstrate some capability
to increase their reputation. We oftentimes call these
folks script kiddies. Let's talk a little bit
about their motives. Fundamentally, hobbyists
are curious about how technology works and where
the vulnerabilities lie. These are individuals
who act alone, but they oftentimes cross the line and they violate
confidentiality or the integrity of
datasets or they could potentially impact the access to a device or service itself. Fundamentally,
hobbyists are curious about how technology
works and oftentimes, they'll exploit a particular
system or service to demonstrate their capability and to improve their reputation. But these activities can be illegal and it's important
to remember that. Just because you're curious, doesn't mean that you should
be doing that activity. You can easily cross the line. Let's talk a little bit about the tools that
hobbyists may use. In penetration testing in
cybersecurity industry, there's a particular build
of Linux called Kali. In Kali, there are a variety
of different utilities and other tools that are helpful in doing things like
reconnaissance. Now, we'll talk more about reconnaissance in
another episode. But the ability to
actually search your target and
identify a variety of pieces of information that
help you identify where the weaknesses are, is
fundamentally important. Hobbyists are able to leverage utilities that
have been built by other people to conduct this
type of reconnaissance. There are tools
for exploitation, the ability to identify
the vulnerability, and to throw a particular
piece of code at it in order for you to exploit
that vulnerability. All of these things are
found in Kali Linux. There are tools for
delivery that once I've identified what that particular
exploit code should be, the ability for
me to throw it at a particular target is
a means of delivery. Now, again, we'll talk
more about reconnaissance, exploitation and delivery
in future episodes. In this particular
Kali Linux build, you can see a variety of
open source free tools that hobbyists can
leverage in order to take advantage of weakly
defended systems. What kind of attacks do we actually see coming
from hobbyists? We always see a range of different low-level
type attacks. These include things like
defacing of a website, which is just simply
graffiti on the website. The ability to execute a
denial of service attack. The ability to throw
enough packets at a particular target so that
it is unable to respond. You're denying service of that particular
application server. A SQL injection attack
where you're just modifying the URL and tricking the database
behind that website to reveal more information
than intended. It could involve
guessing passwords, doing what we call
brute force attacks. Finally, even "Google hacking". If you know how to use the lexicon and
Google, good enough, you may be able to identify information that was not
intended to be made public. That can be really
quite useful when you want to access a
particular system. One good example of
a hobbyist attack comes from Budapest
in Hungary in 2017. In 2017, the Budapest
Transport Authority had launched a new
online ticketing system. There were many,
many security flaws, including an admin
account password that was set up as "adminadmin". An 18-year-old hobbyists was able to manipulate
the website very, very easily to purchase a
$36 ticket for 20 cents. Now, that particular hobbyists was motivated by curiosity, identified a particular
vulnerability and then notified the
appropriate authorities. The problem was, he crossed the line and he was
arrested and prosecuted. Even though this
particular hobbyists, this particular threat actor, really did not have
malicious intent, really thought that
they were doing the right thing by publicly
exposing a vulnerability, they did cross the line, and so therefore they were
arrested and prosecuted. Hobbyists really are
opportunistic targeters. They look for where
vulnerabilities might lie. They do broad-based
scanning of the Internet, they identify where a
particular vulnerability might lie and then
they execute on it. They're opportunistic. In fact, if we take a look at data just over a
couple of years. In this particular case, we're looking at a dataset
from 2014-2018, the vast, vast majority of the
attacks that we see being conducted by hobbyists are
against professional services. These include things like
Dennis office or accountants. They tend to be weakly defended networks and so hobbyist take advantage of those
weakly defended networks to execute some effect. What are some of the
takeaways from this module? First of all, hobbyists
tend to be low skilled, and lightly resource
threat actors. They are motivated primarily by curiosity and by a desire
to build a reputation. They tend to leverage
established tools and tactics. These threat actors are not building their own
custom software, they're not reverse engineering the really complicated systems, they're taking advantage of
what is already been done. In our next episode, we'll talk about criminal actors and the threat they represent. I hope to see you next time.