Hi, welcome back to
cybersecurity for everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. We've been talking about
the hacking process. If you remember, hacking is
not simply a single action. It's a series of different actions that
when strung together, represent this idea of hacking. In this episode, we're going
to talk about weaponization. What is weaponization? At this stage of the
hacking process, threat actors have finished
their reconnaissance. They've evaluated the
particular organization. They've looked at the
technical vulnerabilities of those systems and now they're preparing a
particular plan of attack. They've identified specific vulnerabilities
in technical systems. That could include things
like the operating system or even the applications that are
on that particular device. Those exploits that
they generate, take advantage of these
identified vulnerabilities. Those known vulnerabilities
are often categorized. There might even be sample
code that's actually already written to take advantage of that particular
vulnerability. A repository of known
vulnerabilities, known as the Common
Vulnerabilities and Exposure index or CVE is a repository of known
vulnerabilities in technical systems
that's maintained by the MITRE Corporation. You can find this repository in a searchable form at
www.cve.mitre.org. Threat actors leverage
known vulnerabilities or sometimes even unknown
vulnerabilities to exploit specific devices. If there's a vulnerability
in a particular version of Windows or Linux
or macOS system, then they would write a particular exploit to take advantage of that vulnerability. Unknown vulnerabilities are
known as zero-day exploits. What is that weaponization
process then? Well, threat actors have conducted their reconnaissance
and they've identified those weaknesses that we now know is a vulnerability
in that system. They write an exploit
to take advantage of a vulnerability and
they'll write this in any number of
computer languages, something like
Python, for instance. Those vulnerabilities
provide a window of access to a targeted device. When it is delivered, when that exploit is delivered, it opens up a window into
that targeted device. Those exploits are wrapped together with some
delivery mechanism, which we'll talk about
in a future episode. They focus that effort against a very specific device
or even a human target. What are some of the takeaways
about weaponization? Well, remember,
hacking is a process. The second phase of that
process is weaponization. Weaponization is about
writing an exploit to take advantage of a known or unknown vulnerability
in a system. Exploits are paired with a means of delivery to a
specific target, either a machine or a person. In our next episode, we'll talk about delivery and the importance of delivery
in the hacking process. I hope to see you next time.