Hi, welcome back to
cybersecurity for everyone. I'm Dr. Charles Harry. In our last episode, we finished up talking about how the Internet actually works, how data moves from one point
in the Earth to the next. But remember, when we
started off this course, we talked a lot
about how cyber was this mix between human
and technical systems. Where do the humans
come into play? In this episode, I want to
talk about how we actually can think about managing something as complex as the Internet. Remember, the Internet is this broad collection of independent networks that
all have to work together. As we saw in our
last few episodes, there's a lot going on. How do we actually manage that? The problem is, how do we manage the broad set of issues
surrounding this technology? Those issues aren't
necessarily all technical. What do I mean by that? What type of concerns do I mean? Well, they might be
technical in nature. I might have a new
technology that I want to leverage
on the Internet. Well, who comes up with
the rules to do so? What are the institutions and processes I need in order
to make that happen? They might be concerns
surrounding the private sector. Companies have to
make decisions on what type of information
they need to protect. Who gets to make that decision? It could be public in nature. Governments might want to make a determination
that there are some organizations that are so critically important that they
have a right to regulate. How do they make that decision? Who decides? These are important questions. Finally, there might be broad-based
international concerns. How do governments
interact with one another? Are there certain
rules of the game that they want to
come up with that determine whether
something is allowable under international
laws and norms? This concept of process
and institutions working together to actually
create a set of rules is something
that we call governance. In order to manage the myriad of technical privacy
operational issues, we need human processes. The technology is not
going to get us there. The set of processes we use
constitutes governance. There are multiple, what we call stakeholders involved
in this process. It's not simply about
national leaders. The private sector is involved, not-for-profit
institutions are involved. Local, state, federal
policymakers are involved. All of them together, working together
constitute a variety of different stakeholders and a multi-stakeholder
process that allows us to govern all the various complexities
of the Internet. Something as large as the Internet requires
governance structures. But it is important to
remember that governance is not simply about
managing the technology, it also requires us to have processes that manage the myriad of
organizational challenges. How do we assess risk in
critical infrastructure? How do we manage the
relations between countries? These are fundamentally
non-technical questions. They are informed
by the technology, but they themselves are human processes that we
need to be able to manage. Some of these institutions
and processes even discuss cyber activity that is permissible under
international law. What I mean by that is, our country is able to apply cyber activity
in an offensive way. If so, what are the
rules of the game? Are there certain things
that are too critical that we absolutely want to make
sure that no one touches? Those are agreed to
rules between nations. Those are happening at a
non-technical level and require a governance structure from multiple stakeholders. What do we take away from
this particular episode? The complexity of the Internet
requires institutions and processes to help manage the broad level of complexity
we see in the Internet. Remember the last
several episodes talk specifically about the technology and
talked about how data moved from one point of
the Earth to the next. Those are rules that
are established. Those rules are
established by people. That's fundamentally
important to understand when we want
to talk about security. Because based on decisions
that people make, there might be some vulnerabilities
that are introduced. We need to understand
that process. Governance is that process
by which we manage the technical information on organizational
problems that arise. Finally, multiple
stakeholders are involved in this process. It's not simply about
national leaders. The private sector is involved, individual citizens
are involved. Not-for-profits, local,
state, federal governments, and frankly, even international
government structures are heavily involved. In our next episode, we're going to talk
about a few of the Internet governance
structures that exist. I hope to see you next time.