[MUSIC] Hi, welcome back. This is dr Charles harry. And this is cyber security for everyone. In our last video we talked
about what we meant by cyber. And in this video we want to talk
about what we mean by security. And together, cybersecurity helps
define what we want to speak about for the rest of this particular course. So what is security? Security, if we take a look
at a textbook definition, freedom from danger or
freedom from fear or anxiety? So we're talking about is how can
we make ourselves more secure or more free from fear? So what do we mean by achieving security? Well, security actually comes from in
a variety of different perspectives. You can achieve security at
a variety of different levels, whether it's for an individual or for
a corporation or even for a nation state. And so these range of what we call
actors leverage a variety of tools. Some of them might be technical, some of them might be processed
based to secure themselves. To make them more free from danger or
threat. If you're an individual, you might use
something like technology, an anti virus. Many of you are quite familiar with this
type of technology where you're constantly looking for the latest threats. That might actually,
if I enter onto your device. You might use an architecture change
things like changing up how your network is actually structured and
built in order to better protect yourself. And you do that at an individual level at
your home network, you could be, if you're a corporation focus on an additional
type of tools to secure yourself. Yes, you might use technology
includes anti virus, but it might also include what we would
call an intrusion detection system. A piece of software or an application
that's running that tells you if someone is actually penetrated your network. You might make changes to
your own architecture. You might create multiple networks
that are what we call air gap that are physically
separated from one another. You might leverage risk management
techniques to decide that some parts of your network matter more than others. And therefore that's where you should
spend your money to defend yourself. You might actually incorporate insurance
as a way to protect yourself in the case of a large scale intrusion. These are all various examples of tools
that corporations might actually use and they are distinct from what
individuals might use. Finally, if you're a nation state,
if you're a country, the United States of America yes,
you might leverage technology. Yes, you might use risk
management programs, but you're also going to bring
other special assets to play. Things like your intelligence services,
the Central Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency and others. FBI to determine what threats
you should respond to. Or you have potentially to incorporate
information about vulnerabilities in networks and how you might
actually be able to plug those up. You might use what we call hard power,
the ability to use your military to respond to certain threats
to make yourself feel more secure. So security comes in
a variety of flavors and it comes in a range of different actors. So security can be obtained for
individuals. Security can be obtained for
corporations and organizations, but it can also be obtained for
countries Red Large. So a working definition of
cyber security together this notion of complexity along with
the range of various actors and the tools that they can bring
to bear to secure themselves. Might, includes something like or
might be akin to something like cybersecurity is the organization and
collection of resources. Processes and structures used to protect
cyberspace in cyberspace enabled system. So what we're talking about here is
in order to achieve security in cyber is that it's not simply about technology. Technology is foundational,
no doubt about it, but includes resources,
processes and structures. Which include governance at a national
level as well as individual implementation of that latest pat for
that specific application. And so
hopefully what you're starting to see here is that when we talk about
something as basic as a definition. Is that it can really be quite informative
about the range of considerations we need to have in order for
us to be more secure in cyberspace. So in this course we're going to be
discussing a variety of different topics to include the evolution and
development of the internet. The global telecommunications environment, how information actually moved from
one point of the earth to the next. How is the internet actually govern? Who makes the rules,
is it a single government? Are they individuals, is a pure anarchy. We'll discuss that. Who are the hackers? And why are they motivated
to do what they do? Why do we have this problem? Are all hackers doing this type
of activity for the same purpose? Where do they have different motives? We're going to actually talk about,
what do we mean by hacking? This is one of those terms that
people very casually throw out, but it's actually a process. Are hackers really simply just,
spending in 30 seconds and immediately get access to the electrical
grid for the country and take it down? Or is it a much more methodical process
that's actually much more difficult to pull off than what
Hollywood would tell you? What are the effects
that they can achieve? Are all hacks focused on the same angle,
are they only about stealing information? Or can some hacks result in
a largely disruptive attacks that we need to account for? What I hope that you've taken away from
the first couple of videos of this course, is that cyber is much more than
simply about the technology. It's much more than just the ones and zeros that we oftentimes hear about in
popular media, it's about complexity. It's about bringing people,
technology organizations together. And it's about trying to secure at
a variety of different levels from you and your home network. To corporations and critical
infrastructure providers to nation states who are seeking to protect
their most valuable secrets. In our next video, we'll talk about
the broad threat landscape and what are the various
topics we need to address. if we're going to get better at
understanding the problem of cybersecurity? Thanks and see you next time.