Hi, my name's Dr. Charles Harry from the
University of Maryland, and this is Cyber Security For Everyone, The Fundamentals. Cyber security is one of these topics that a lot
of people talk about; you hear it on the news, you hear maybe even some of
your friends talking about it as they read some
article in the newspaper. The question is, what
are we talking about? What is cyber security? This question, this fundamental question
is an area that frankly, many of us are confused about. How can we maybe
demystify this subject? That's the goal of this course. We will talk about what do
we mean by cyber security? Maybe the first place
that we should focus on, is really a definition. What do we mean by
cyber security? It's usually a good
place to start. The way I like to think
about cyber security is to break it down into
individual words. Let's define those words, and maybe we can
get a better way to think about this problem before we start our long journey on talking about the threat
actors that are out there, the Internet, all the various tools and techniques
that hackers use. Let's start off with the
very first word, cyber. What do we mean by cyber? If we take a look adjusted, your normal dictionary, something like the
Webster's Dictionary. We get some definition
that looks like this, of relating to or involving computers or computer networks. That sounds reasonable. Because when we
think about cyber, we tend to think of the person in their parents basement with
the hoodie over their head, working away on their laptop,
some brilliant hacker. Of course, cyber has to
be about technology. Is it only about the technology? That's the question. In fact, when you take
a look at some of the historical representations
and definitions of cyber, we get a slightly different view. Let's define the term cyber. How is cyber different than other terms that we often hear? Terms like information assurance
or information security, or even things like cybernetics, or computer security,
or something is generic as IT security. How is cyber different? If we actually explore this term, if we explore it and take look at some of its
historical roots, we start to figure out that
cyber is actually something a little bit broader than
just the technology. Cyber really evolves
historically, from this larger field. The larger field was
often termed way back in the 1940s, cybernetics, which dealt with the field of controlling
communications theory, whether in machine
or in the animal. That sounds like a really,
really strange quote, but what we're talking about here is not just about technology, not just about the machine. We're also talking about
the animal or the people. This term, starting all
the way back in 1948, evolves and morphs
itself over the years. Eventually becomes popularized in a novel Neuromancer then
maybe some of you have actually read or
had the opportunity to review in the past. But this ability to blend
technology with people is what starts to make
cyber different than IT security or
computer security. It's broader. It's this
confluence between technology, human beings, and human organizations that really
make it different. That's why we talk
about cyber instead of IT security or computer
security. It's different. It's about this
complex system and this interplay
between technology, people, and organizations. Yes, cyber is about technology. That's something that
we're going to talk a lot about through this course. We have to talk about things like laptops,
application servers, databases, smartphones,
sensors, networks, and even autonomous cars. Something that we're looking forward to over the
next 10 to 15 years. But cyber is also
about the humans. It's not simply about technology. It's about the hobbyists, the people who just enjoy
playing around with technology. It's about the social activists that are out there
who might want to leverage computers and their
insight into organizations, how to advance their
personal agenda and their organization's agenda. It's also about
criminal syndicates who want to leverage
technology and their insights about people in their failings in order
to obtain more money. It's about intelligence
operatives. People who work on
behalf of other nations, who are interested
in understanding a variety of secrets
about other nations. It's about the technologists, the people who are
deeply embedded in the technology who want
to defend networks. It's certainly about
the policy makers, the people who have
to make the rules, the people who help
govern in this space. Certainly it's about corporate executives and
corporate leadership. They're the ones making
decisions about where to spend their scarce resources
to defend networks. Cyber is not simply
about technology, it's also about the humans, but cyber is also about
the organizations. Things like corporations and water treatment facilities,
electric companies, maritime transport companies, rail and certainly
nuclear power plants, and many, many more. It's not simply about
the technology, it's not just about the
computers and the software, that's running on those devices. It's more than just
the humans that are operating those
particular machines, but they both come together
in a broader set of organizations, and that matters. It matters because when we talk about things like
an attack surface, the broad array of devices and vulnerabilities that hackers
leverage and exploit. We have to think about
humans and machines, how they work together to
produce a product or a service. That helps us understand where our vulnerabilities lie and where the risks are to all
of society in some cases. Cyber is complex. Yes, it includes technology, it's hardware and software
running on various devices. But it's also about the
people, technologists, executives, public officials, and the hackers themselves
and their motivations. Finally about the organizations, the private and public sector. When does a cyber
security issue become a public concern and not
simply a private problem? How do we make that
determination? These things come
together and it moves us beyond simply evaluating
the technology. Cyber is much more
than the ones and zeros that we often hear
about in popular media. It's about the confluence between technology, humans,
and organizations. It is not stand alone. We need to think about
this holistically. If we wanted to come up with a working definition of cyber, and certainly there are lots of different definitions that exist. One in particular that I'd like is from the Public
Safety Board of Canada. It really emphasizes
this interaction between humans and technology. The idea is that there's an electronic world
that's interconnected, filled with networks of
information technology. But in addition, it's
a global commons where people are linked together to exchange ideas, services,
and friendship. I think at the heart
of this definition, it highlights what we've
just been talking about, which is that cyber is
a issue of complexity between technology,
individuals, and organizations. In this video, we've talked
about the term cyber and how cyber is much more than simply about the technology. It's about technology, individuals and organizations
working together. In our next video, we're going to talk
about what we mean by security. See you next time.