Welcome everyone to
the Psychology of Wellness. I am really excited to be joined
here today by Dr. Elizabeth Dunn. Dr. Dunn is a professor in the Department
of Psychology at the University of British Columbia, where she does really
cool work on self-knowledge, happiness, positive psychology, and how mobile technology can help
us improve our happiness. She is the co-author of a super
fantastic book called Happy Money, The Science of Happier Spending,
which she wrote with Dr. Mike Norton. Her work has appeared in all kinds
of fantastic journals including, I think,
three papers published in science. And she has a really cool TEDx Talk. Liz, thank you for
joining us so much today. And so here in the course we've been thinking about all the misconceptions
we have about happiness. And what we've seen in the course so far
all these cases where we mispercieve or miswant certain things in our lives. We think we really want better grades or
we think we want a very high salary, but the impact on our happiness of those
things isn't as much as we think. And we've also seen cases
where there is this stuff that does in fact make us happy,
where empirical evidence suggests that getting more of that is
going to have a big impact. But we don't have the intuition
that we really want that, and so we don't seek out those activities. And I wanted you to talk today about
your work showing that one of these really important things that
really can boost happiness and flourishing, is the act
of being kind to others. Maybe even the opposite
of getting money for ourselves, giving money away to others. So talk a little bit about how you got
interested in this question, right? We often think about
accumulating wealth for ourselves rather than giving up wealth. How did you get into doing research
on that as a focus of happiness? >> Yeah, so I first got interested
in this question when for the first time in my life I
started actually making money. So I got my first real job when I was 26. And I wondered now that I was
suddenly a normal income earner, what do I do with all of this money
because I was used to living at the poverty level sort
of student lifestyle. So being a nerdy psychologist
kind of turned to the literature to see what the research literature could
tell me about how to use my money in order to be happy. And I was surprised to find there
really wasn't a whole lot out there. There was a few strands,
but just not very much. And so I started thinking about some work suggesting that helping others
can actually be good for us. So I thought, well, what if we use
money to benefit other people? Might that actually promote
our happiness more so than using that money
to benefit ourselves. So to start to get
a handle on that question, we decided to basically
make it rain money. And we went out on campus and
just literally walked up to people and handed them money. So we gave people either a $5 or
a $20 bill, which we asked them to spend
by the end of the day. Now there was a catch. So we told half the people they had
to spend the money on themselves. We told half the people they had to
spend the money to benefit others. And what we found when we called people
back at the end of the day was that people who were assigned to take this money and
use it to benefit others were actually happier than those who'd been assigned
to use that money to help themselves. >> And so did that hold across
different amounts of money? Does it matter? Do you have to give lots
of money to someone else? Did you see any effects of
amount of money on these things? >> So that study was pretty small. Much smaller than the studies
that I would run now. >> [LAUGH]
>> And so we weren't able to detect any differences between getting
$5 versus getting $20, didn't seem to matter that much. What was interesting though, even that
very small study was that even just giving people $5 to spend on somebody else made a
difference to their happiness on that day. So this suggests that although
it might be great to make big changes on how you spend your money,
making even little changes. Using your money to even engage in small
generous acts like treating your friend to coffee or helping out somebody
who's having a rough day by getting them some flowers might actually
do something for your own mood. That's big enough for
us to be able to detect. >> That's really cool. And that is one of these cases, I love this work because it absolutely
doesn't fit with my intuition. My intuition if I have a bad day is
I'm going to go out and get a treat or I'm going to go get a pedicure. I'm going to do something nice for myself. I'm never thinking, let me get my
best friend a pedicure because that would make me feel a lot better. Was that your subject's intuition as well? >> Yeah, we actually asked people,
if we just gave you some money and had you spend it,
how would you like to spend it? People generally do seem to have share
your intuition that that pedicure option sounds great and yeah,
I'll take the money for myself. Thank you ever so much. And indeed I think that intuition
particularly comes into play when we are just short of gliding through our
days and making split second decisions, you're feeling a little bit in a bad
mood or want to cheer yourself up. It's very natural I think to want to use
our resources to do stuff for ourselves. And again,
there's nothing wrong with that. I think spending money on
ourselves can be great and there's some good ways to do that. But I think we may overlook this
opportunity to buy happiness by helping others. >> And another thing about your work
is that you show that this isn't just isolated to say UBC
students that you studied. This seems to be
a cross-cultural phenomenon. Do you want to talk about
the follow ups that you did? >> Yeah, so
when we started doing this work, it was all conducted in North America. And it was actually when I was sharing
this work with the media and with students that people kept asking me, okay, but
you're looking at fairly well off people. Individuals who have a fair
bit of disposable income. So is this just something to do with
sort of people having extra money and not knowing what to do with it? And I took that issue pretty seriously and
so what we decided to do was to see if we could
find the same effects in kind of corners of the world where people really were
struggling to meet their own basic needs. And actually my husband
helped find me collaborators. He was doing some work in Uganda at
the time and actually just went up to people and asked them to help get
involved with running the study. And so we developed this team
of collaborators in Uganda and eventually South Africa. And we were able to run parallel
experiments across different countries. And what we see is that even when people
are really struggling a little bit, when they don't always have enough money to buy
food for themselves, even in those places, we still see that people feel happier
when they use money to benefit others. >> Awesome, so even if the money that you're dealing
with isn't a disposable income, even when those purchases for the self
could be really impactful on the self, you still get more hand of happiness
bang for your buck spending on others. >> Right, and I think it's so surprising
because I think many of us kind of tell ourselves I'll give to charity
once I am making more money. Or other people, the people that
are a little wealthier than me, they should definitely give. But I just need to look out to myself. And I think this research is kind
of a nice wake up call and saying, hey, these people in Uganda who report on our surveys that they were struggling to
find money to pay for malaria medication, even they are getting this emotional
boost from using money to benefit others. So we don't need to wait until
we are making more money. This is something that you can do
today and you can do in small ways. >> That's awesome. So this is nice work
showing that spending on others actually makes you happier
than spending on the self. But you also have work suggesting that
even focusing on money at all might not be the best thing to focus on. Or kind of prioritizing your time towards
earning potential might not be as good as prioritizing your time
to just having time. Do you want to talk about some
of the time affluence work? >> In our recent work,
we have been really interested in these constant trade offs that people
are navigating between time and money. So if you think about it, most of
the time you could have more money, but you probably have to give
up some of your time. Or you can have more time, but
it might cost you some money. And so we wondered whether there's sort
of chronic dispositional differences, whereby some individuals are more likely
to be willing to give up their time to have more money, and some are willing to
give up their money to have more time. And indeed, when we've now
conducted very broad surveys, nationally representative surveys
within North America, at least. And what we see is that the population of
North America seems to be pretty split down the middle. >> Interesting. >> That about half of the people
seem to prioritize money, and about half seem to prioritize time when
sort of faced with these trade offs. And so
you can see the value in trading off one against the other
depending on the situation. But sort of dispositionally,
when we look across situations, what we see is that individuals who
chronically prioritize time over money, who are willing to give up their
money to have more time or to say work fewer hours in
order to have more free time. We see that they are happier than
individuals who prioritize money, and kind of aren't willing to give up
their money to have more time. >> Excellent, so in some sense,
time makes you more affluent than wealth makes you affluent, or
at least makes you happier in some sense. >> Yeah, and so what is definitely
clear is that both time affluence and material affluence matter for well-being. So I think sometimes people hear sort of
a little sound bite about my work and they think that it means,
money can't buy happiness. And that's not true.
Money can buy happiness. People who have more money are happier. But also people who have more time
are happier, up to a point, right? So people who say that they feel
really busy and pressed for time, like they haven't had enough time to do
the things that are important to them, tend to be less happy. And interestingly, the wealthier you get, the less likely you
are to feel like you have enough time. And that seems to be both a function of
the objective realities of wealthy people, for example, working more. But also this sort of subjective
perception that as your time becomes more economically valuable, you tend to view it as scarce
because what is valuable is scarce. And so what we're seeing then is that
perhaps people need to kind of re-jiggle their priorities a little bit. At least one set of basic
material needs are met, it may be worthwhile to think
about prioritizing time. >> That's fantastic. And so throughout that course,
we keep hearing that to do this we sometimes have to put these
intentional practices in place, right? We might have this intuition to just spend
all our time making as much money as possible, or that we need to buy things
for ourselves when we're having a bad day. But those intuitions are wrong. And we talk about how you need to put
intentional practices in place to do this better. Your mind is not going to tell you to do
it automatically, so set your habits up so you can do this to
maximize your happiness. Now, have you taken some
these research to heart? Have you started in your own life trying
to put these practices in place for either kind of for social spending or
for time affluence. >> Yeah, I mean, so
first up I would say it really is hard sometimes to put these
ideas into practice. So I have to admit when I started doing
all this for social spending research, I was meeting with my tax accountant and he started tapping the line where it
said how much I donated to charity. He's like, gosh, I sure have seen
your name in the media a lot. >> [LAUGH]
>> That's the value of charity. I was like,
I guess [LAUGH] a little bit more. And so I think I have tried to
alter my approaches a little bit. For one thing I think in
our charitable giving work, one thing that we see is that
charitable giving doesn't just automatically make people
happier all the time. It really depends on how you do it. And so charitable giving opportunities
that make you feel more connected to others, charitable giving opportunities
where you can really see the impact that your generosity is having,
tend to have the biggest emotional boost. And are therefore most likely
to be self-reinforcing. And so I've tried, in my own life, to try
to seek out some of those opportunities. So for example, with a group of
friends because I live in Canada, we're able to bring over
a family of Syrian refugees. And basically kind of help them adjust
to life, and provide for them for the first year that they're here. And so that's a kind of opportunity where
I think it's very emotionally rewarding. Because it's a group of friends working
together to do something that we find really meaningful, where we'll get to see the difference
that our actions are having. And so I guess, through my work,
I've learned to be on the lookout for those kinds of opportunities, where I can not just sort of click donate
on a website which is also great, but really have the chance to see
the impact that my actions are having. >> And that kind of fits with your work,
too, right? Because in the original studies,
even in the $5 studies, give this to a friend or
do something nice for a friend. Didn't you find that doing nice things for
others is boosting your social connection, and that might be one mediating factor
that leads to increased happiness, is that right? >> It does seem to be one
very important factor, yeah. So the more that people are getting
a sense of social connection from their giving,
the happier they turn out to be. >> Excellent, cool. And so
how about on the time affluence side, has that work led you to kind of
prioritize slightly differently? >> Yeah,
I struggled with the time affluence. [LAUGH]
>> [LAUGH] So one of the reasons that I'm doing
the course, is I tell my students is that I can notice myself being in some
ways a hypocrite about this, right? Where I know this work really well. I know how you build in habits. But then I look in my own life and
I'm not necessarily pursuing habits or kind of doing them because they
take this intentional work. So don't feel bad, you're just modeling. [LAUGH] Modeling a thing or two. >> One thing I do is that I have
thought fairly intentionally about the parts of my day that are the most
frustrating or least happy. And I try to ask myself, can I use money
to eliminate those moments of my day? Because that's likely to be a really
good use of money based on our research. And for me, I am the worst cleaner ever. Cleaning as my husband will be quick
to point out, he's great at cleaning. He can clean the kitchen like that. For me,
it will take an hour to do a terrible job. And so
I've decided it's just worth it to pay for a house cleaner, even though it
seems a little bit indulgent. It takes out that terrible part of my day,
terrible part of my week. So it's a way that I can use
money in order to buy happiness. >> Yeah, and
use money to buy extra time, right? because it's not the time that
you spend cleaning, too, as well. >> Exactly. >> But you're also a surfer, right? So I feel like you must have some time
off or at least on your web page, it mentions you being a surfer, so yeah. >> I think [LAUGH] My colleagues would
say that I'm okay at maintaining the work life balance thing. But it's still challenging, right? Because I think we forget how busy
we're going to be in the future. So it's easy, I always think,
I'm too busy to do that tomorrow, but in two weeks I'll
definitely have time. And so that's one other thing that I've
learned from my own work and from other's work is to try to think about, okay,
if I don't feel like I have time to do this this week, I probably won't feel
like I have time to do it in six months. And so trying to restrain myself a little
bit in terms of how many things I take on. >> Perfect, perfect well, it's good to hear some aspects of
the work being put into practice. But also the example that we keep talking
about in the course, where this is hard. It takes intentional effort, and
you have to kind of go against. Even if you know this work, it's hard to
kind of make that part of your intuitions. So thank you so much. Again, this was Professor Elizabeth Dunn. You should check out her book, Happy
Money, The Science of Happier Spending. Thanks so much, Liz. >> Thanks Lori.