So that's the set of topics, and we're going to start with
this idea of misconceptions. But I though since this is the first
of these lectures, it might be useful to kind of give an introduction
of why I wanted to do this class, because I think that sort of shows off the
point of why I think this is so important. Like why teach this class now? Some of you know I teach
a class here on campus, that's a class on evolutionary psychology,
I think some of you even took that class. And I didn't need to start
teaching a new psychology class, in fact it's a lot of work to come up with
this stuff, still working on the lectures, it takes a lot of time. But I decided to do this for a couple of
reasons, and I decided to do it now for a couple of reasons. The first, and there's going to be
three reasons why I decided to do this. The first of those three reasons is
that this is the time that is ripe for thinking about applying
the science of psychology, in part because, we are learning a ton
about how to apply like these kind of concepts about how we
can make ourselves happier. We actually have lots of insights into
the kinds of things that make us happier, that make us laugh,
that make our life more fulfilling. And we know this, in part because, not
only are scientists coming up with good ways to study this stuff,
good ways to measure this stuff, but folks that really think about
applying science to public policy, to practice, are using this stuff a ton. So these are a couple of different
articles about different programs in government, both in the UK and here in the
states to apply the science of psychology to kind of nudge people's
behavior in the right directions, nudge people to save more,
nudge people to eat healthier, and so on. And the amazing thing is that these
programs, even when they're implemented in large government scales,
actually seem to work amazingly well. There's tons of successes of applying this
stuff to changing people's behavior in real time. So never before have we really had so many
insights that I could actually teach you about and kind of time is right to start
applying this stuff in our own lives. So that's kind of Reason #1, lots of
insights there to teach you guys about. Second reason though is that we kind of
really need these insights pretty badly, because the fact is that
we're not as happy or as kind of increased in our
well-being as we sort of need to be. I'll give you an article,
this is from 2013 on ABC News, Americans Most Unhappy
People In The World, right? And this is 2013,
this is before our divisive election, this is a little bit before kind of
the recession, we're just kind of unhappy. Couple of quick statistics,
we prescribe antidepressants at 400 times the rate that we did 20 years ago,
400 times the rate than 20 years ago. Most surveys show that Americans and a lot of people in general
are not getting happier. And if you look at some subsets of the
population, surveys like the Harris Survey and so on, have shown that certain groups
are actually getting more unhappy, and one of those groups is recent graduates, like
a lot of you guys are about to be soon. Like getting more unhappy
than they've ever been and more unhappy than they were before. So this is like not cool,
like people kind of need this stuff. Like we're just this society,
like kind of walk around, like not being as happy as we could be,
so we kind of need this. But I think, one of the reasons
I chose to teach this here, and then I'm talking to you guys and not only
doing the online course, is the we, is a kind of broad we, it's like society
at large, but I think the we here on campus, is like even more needy, that
like you Yale students need this stuff. And so, that was reason number two, I decided to teach this course now is that
you guys, you guys broadly as a society, and you guys as Yale students
really need this stuff. But the third reason is actually the most
personal one of why I wanted to teach this, which is that it's not just Yale
students that need these insights, I actually need these insights too. So I'm kind of like below
average on my own happiness. So you might have the thought that like
the professor teaching this course is like this smiley, happy, and I go through
life around all these Yale students who are sad, and I'm like "I'm going to make
you guys as happy as I am." But in fact that is not true,
if anything it's like I'm sad. [INAUDIBLE]
>> [LAUGH]