Hello, in this video we will discuss
what to say when you are networking. Job seekers often meet many people
while they are searching for a job. We will discuss how to prepare and
practice networking elevator speech. Which is a short description of skills and
career goals. For many of us, it is easier to meet and
talk to new people if we have prepared and practiced something to
say about ourselves. Let's imagine that you
just got on an elevator with a high level manager in your company. After you greet each other, you want to tell the manager
a little bit more about yourself. What would you say? Most people would say nothing, and miss the chance to make a good
impression on the manager. However,successful job seekers
should have a prepared statement they can use to introduce
themselves to another person quickly. This short description is
known as an elevator speech. Because the average amount of time
in an elevator is about 45 seconds. Even though the elevator speech is short,
each should give enough information to make the listener know
who you are, and what you can do. Let's start with the basic information
that you should include in your elevator speech. First, tell them your full name and current job title,
department, or employer. Second, tell the other person
what you are looking for. Information or a kind of job in
an industry, field, or location. Third, tell them something
about a past job or experience that could
be important to them. Fourth, tell them about a job skill
that you have and are very good at. After you've described
a little bit about yourself, then you can ask the other
person a general question. A general question is one
that is easy to answer. For example, do you know if the company
is hiring anyone right now? Asking questions helps to keep
the conversation going, and allows you to find out more about them. Let's see how an example job seeker, Amanda Smith,
would introduce herself when networking. In this situation, Amanda is at a professional conference
with many people in the auto industry. And she is talking with
some people from Toyota. Here's an example of what she
could say to introduced herself. First, she greets them with her name and
gives her current job. Hello, I'm Amanda Smith and
I have been in sales for about five years. Second, she explains
what she's looking for. I'm currently looking for
a sales position in the auto industry. Third, she tells them about a current or
past experience. One of the things I like most about sales,
is meeting and talking with new customers all the time. Fourth, she describes a job skill. I'm really good at listening to customers,
and I am able to understand
what they really want. Lastly, she asks a general question. Do you know if Toyota is hiring
any new salespeople in this area? So, by asking a question at the end,
Amanda keeps the conversation going, and gives the listeners a chance
to introduce themselves as well. The question at the end is optional or
your choice. In summary, job seekers should have
a short, prepared description or an elevator speech that they can use to
introduce themselves when networking. A good elevator speech includes your name
and current job, what you are looking for, something from a past experience, and a
short description of your best job skill. Even though it is short, it can give other
people a lot of information about you. In the next video, we will talk about how to deliver
your elevator speech with confidence.