Hello and welcome to the final
unit in career development. In this unit, we're going to talk about
the last step in the job search process, the job interview. By now, you've written a great resume and
cover letter. You've practised your
networking elevator speech. And you've got a job interview. In this video, we will go over
some important things to know about job interviews in the United States. This is your chance to answer questions
about your skills and qualifications. Ask questions about the job or the company, and make a positive
impression on the employer. In later videos, we will focus on
the language of questions, show you some sample questions you could hear
in a job interview and how to answer them. At the end of the unit, you will record your own answer to
a typical job interview question. Let's begin with some basic
information about job interviews. A job interview is a formal
meeting between an employer and a job seeker to decide if
the person should get the job. The employer is called the interviewer and
is the person asking the questions. The job seeker is called the interviewee
and is the person answering the questions. Job interviews are usually in person or
face-to face and are quite formal. Sometimes, interviews can be done
by phone or video conference. To be more successful,
job seekers can prepare for an interview by practising answers with
specific examples of their skills and qualifications from their past experience. Interviews are a great chance to
explain your qualifications and transferable skills with examples or
short stories. For example, many employers look for people who can show leadership skills or
creativity in solving problems. You can prepare answers that
show you have these skills by using examples from your past
work experiences or education. Remember, you're not memorizing
answers but just preparing some short specific examples that you can use to
answer common interview questions. For example, if an interviewer said tell me about
the time that you solved a problem. I would talk about how
I created a document to help other teachers
plan their schedules. Here's another example question. If the interviewer says what did you
learn from working at XYZ company? I would answer by saying I learned
many things about new software and computer programs to manage
information in a busy office. By having a short prepared example,
I would feel more confident in my answer. I can always add more information in
the interview and give more details. But at least I have something to say when
an interviewer asks these questions. Sometimes interview questions
can be difficult to answer. It is a good idea to ask for
clarification or repetition if you don't
understand the question. You will learn how to do
this in a later video. Before an interview, job seekers
should prepare a list of questions that they want to ask the interviewer
about the company or about the job itself. By asking two or three questions, the candidate shows
interest in the job and the company. Some examples of possible
questions to ask are one, what are the daily
responsibilities of this job? Two, what computer equipment or
software does the company use? Finally, job-seekers should
make a positive impression by looking professional. They do this by wearing professional
clothes such a business suit or dress. You should be on time or
early to the interview. During the interview,
keep eye contact with the interviewer. Give clear and honest answers, and bring extra copies of important documents
like resumes or certifications. In summary, job-seekers should be
prepared for job interviews with examples of theirs skills and
qualifications to answer the questions. Job seekers should also ask a couple
of questions about the organization or the job duties. And finally, job seekers should
make a positive impression by presenting themselves professionally. Now go on to a reading, which tells you
more information about job interviews.