Hello. Welcome to Unit 4. In this unit, we're going to focus on some
of the speaking skills that are important for job seekers to develop. Networking is a big part
of the job search process. We're going to talk about
what networking is and why it is important in
your career development. In later videos we will focus on
what to say and how to say it. Let's begin with some definitions. First, a network is a connection
between many things or people. In career development, networking
means connecting with other people to talk about your job search and
career goals. You can talk to other people formally
at a professional conference or informally at lunch with friends. When you are networking you
are meeting new people and learning more about different jobs and
companies. Networking is about building professional
relationships, which take time to grow. When you meet new people you
learn about common interests, or things you both know about. For example,
two co-workers meet while working for a large financial company in New York. They quickly learn that they both
went to the same university. This common background is the beginning
of their professional relationship. And may help them learn about some
other things that they have in common. Such as, major or subject areas, work experiences,
or other people they both know. These are called mutual friends,
or acquaintances. When you meet new people, and discover common interests, they become
a part of your professional network. There are many ways to increase or
add to your professional network. First, you can join
a professional organization, which is a group of people with
similar occupations or careers. Second, you can use social media websites
like LinkedIn, Facebook or Twitter. Third, you can contact
College Alumni groups. Alumni groups are a connection
of current and past students from the same university. Once you have a group of people,
your network can be very important for your career, because they might know about
job openings that are not advertised. When some companies add jobs,
they may not need to advertise online or in newspapers because they use their
current employees to fill new positions. Let's look at an example of
how networking really works. Jack is a manager at a large tech
company and he is looking for an additional web designer
to add to the team. After he told his team,
Martha remembered that her friend, Jin Soo, is a web designer and
looking for a new job. Martha calls Jin Soo and recommends that
he contact her manager Jack about the job. As a result of this network,
Jin Soo learns about an unadvertised job, sends his resume and cover letter and
interviews for the job. After the interview,
Jin Soo thanks Martha with a phone call or by sending her an e-mail or a letter. In summary, we have learned that
networking is connecting with other people to talk about job
openings and career goals. We also learned how to increase your
network by joining organizations and using social media websites. Remember that networking is about
building professional relationships and can help you to learn about jobs that are
not advertised online or in newspapers. Now, go on to read Text 1 which has more information about networking during the job search.