Hello. In this video, we're going to
talk about the pronunciation and delivery of a networking elevator speech. When we are networking, we not only need
to think about what we are saying but also how we are saying it. We should be aware of our word choices and
how we say them. Speakers who use effective stress,
pausing and intonation are often easier to
understand and show confidence. We will start by defining stress,
pausing and intonation and then we will look at an example of
how the delivery can show confidence. So what are stress,
pausing and intonation? When we talk about stress,
we mean words that are longer and louder. Stressed words are usually important
keywords that you want the listener to hear clearly. Let's look at an example sentence
from Amanda's elevator speech. Which words are longer and louder? I've been in sales for about five years. In this sentence, the word sales and
five years are stressed. These are the words that
the listener needs to hear clearly. Pauses are also important when speaking. Pauses are the short
silence between words. In English there's usually
a pause after stressed words. Some speakers have longer or
shorter pauses, but there is a pause. Let's look at the same sentence and notice
the words that are said together and where to pause. I've been in sales for about five years. Amanda pauses after the word sales and
five years. You should also notice that the pause
follows the words with the most stress. Intonation is the rising or
falling of a sound. Intonation is used to show that you're
asking a question or ending a statement. Rising intonation usually signals that
the speaker isn't finished speaking or signals a yes or no question. Falling intonation is used to
signal the end of a statement or a wh question that begins with who,
what, when, where or how. Let's look at Amanda's intonation. Notice how her intonation falls
at the end of the statement. I'm really good at listening to customers. Now notice that our intonation rises
at the end of this yes or no question. Do you know if Toyota is hiring
any new salespeople in this area? Intonation is important because it
shows your level of confidence. If Amanda has too much rising intonation
she would sound like she's asking too many questions or
that she's not sure of herself. On the other hand, too much falling intonation can make her
sound like she's impatient or unfriendly. In a networking elevator speech
you want to show confidence but not sound impatient or unfriendly. If Amanda doesn't sound confident the other people will not be
confident in her skills or abilities. Likewise, if she sounds impatient, the other people may think
she's not easy to work with. Now, I'm going to say
the networking elevator speech and model the stress, pausing and
intonation that shows confidence. Pay attention to the words
that are louder. Also notice how I pause and
the intonation that I use. Hello, I'm Amanda Smith and
I have been in sales for about five years. I'm currently looking for
a sales position in the auto industry. One of the thing I like
most about sales is meeting is talking with new
customers all the time. I'm really good at
listening to customers and I'm able to understand
what they really want. Do you know if Toyota is hiring
any new salespeople in this area? Let's review what we've learned about
the pronunciation in networking elevator speeches. Job seekers who use stress,
pausing and intonation effectively appear more competent and are more likely
to be successful in their networking. Now go onto a game to hear
different elevator speeches. Use what you know about stress,
pausing, and intonation to choose the best
networking elevator speeches.