Hi there, in this video we are going to
discuss some typical interview questions. We will discuss two types
of these questions and finally look at a few questions
you should ask in an interview. In a typical interview, the interviewer,
or interviewers as sometimes there may be more than one person, is there to find out
if you are the right person for the job. If you are in an interview or
preparing for one, then congratulations. You have got this far because
the employer is seriously considering you as a possible employee. However, you now need to show them that
you really are the person for the job. You can do this by answering the questions
the interviewer asks you in an honest and detailed way. Honest, because the interviewer
wants to know if you are the same person you say you are in your resume and
cover letter. And detailed because you want to give
enough information in your responses. During an interview some questions will
be direct, and some will be indirect. An example of a direct question
is why are you a good fit for this job, or why do you want to work for
this company. These questions should be pretty
clear to understand and answer. Since both questions use why,
you should give reasons in your answers. So you might say in your response,
I believe I'm a good fit for this company because I have
the necessary skills and experience to fit right in and
help the company grow. However, indirect questions
are more difficult to recognize. An example of an indirect question is,
so tell me a little bit about yourself. It's called an indirect question, because
the question doesn't begin with a wh word, like what, where, when, why, who, and
how, which direct questions often use. However, it is still a question,
and you need to listen carefully during the interview for
these types of indirect questions. Let's look at another example
of an indirect question. I wonder if you could tell me about
a time when you faced a challenge and you overcame that challenge. Again, no wh word is used at
the beginning of the question, but the interviewer uses the expression
I wonder if you could tell me. The interviewer is asking you to
share an example from your own life when you had a challenge or a problem,
and explain how you solve that problem. So when you hear this expression, you should recognize it as a question and
be ready to answer it. One final example of
an indirect question is, I'd like to know what type of skills you
have that make you qualified for this job. The speaker uses the expression I'd like
to know, which means can you tell me? Finally, in a typical interview in the US, not only does the interviewer
ask you questions but you will usually have an opportunity at the end of
the interview to ask your own questions. The interviewer might say,
do you have any questions for me? Or do you have any questions of your own? To make a good impression, it's really
important that you have already prepared at least two questions before the
interview and you ask these at this point. The questions should be related to
the job or organization in some way. So for example, you might ask,
what opportunities are there for professional development in this company? Or what is the next step
in the interview process? So now we've discussed some common
questions in job interviews. Next, we're going to look at
some ways you can ask for clarification in an interview when
you don't understand the question. Thanks for watching.