Hello. In this video we're going to
discuss making small talk. We'll define what small talk is,
give some examples of it and explain how making Small Talk is relevant to
networking and ultimately finding a job. So to begin,
let's define what Small Talk is. Small Talk is when you make
polite conversation with someone. Often the conversation is with
someone you don't know very well, so you may have to speak with this
person for the very first time. A conversation may begin as small talk and then continue into speaking
about something more important. But usually, Small Talk is the first stage before you
can get to that more important place. For example, let's say you are in
a business meeting with your co-workers. You might begin the conversation
with one of your colleague by asking her about her family. You might say, hey, Maria, how are you? How's your family doing? Did your youngest start school yet? In this situation, the speaker asks
a question about his co-worker's family. Questions are a good way to
get a conversation started. Usually, small talk sticks to
topics that we consider safe. In the United States, chatting about someone's family
is generally a safe topic. Chatting about the weather
is a safe topic. Chatting about food, or travel,
or movies, are safe topics. Safe topics are ones where you can be
pretty sure that you will not upset, or offend
the person, by talking about these topics. In the US, we usually stay clear
of certain topics, topics that we consider taboo or controversial,
topics that could upset someone. Some examples of taboos in the US
are religion, politics and salary. It's best to avoid discussing
these topics in a conversation, especially with someone you're trying
to make a good impression with. So, you would never say to
a colleague in a conversation, how much money do you make in your job? Perhaps, to help you make small talk, you should have a number of
questions already prepared. That way, you're not tongue tied or
unable to speak when you meet someone. This brings up an important
point regarding small talk or conversation in general, a lot of people
are introverted or shy by nature. They feel uncomfortable talking about
themselves especially to strangers. This is a perfectly normal thing. However, if you have such a personality, you don't want this to stop
you from having a conversation with someone who might possibly
open a door to a future job. You will need to try and find a way to
overcome this personality obstacle. In social situations, like meeting someone
for the first time and feeling pressure to speak, asking questions is a good
way to take the focus off you. If you have a number of questions
already prepared, this will also help take some of the stress away in
these uncomfortable situations. Beforehand, write down a number of
the questions that you can use in these situations. Choose topics from the safe
list we talked about earlier. Here are couple of examples,
one how was your weekend? Did you do anything fun or interesting? Two, the weather forecast looks
very nice for this coming weekend. Do you have any plans? Or three, what restaurants
would you recommend for lunch? These are just a few examples. Try these out of few times on a friend or a family member to see if they work,
and whether you need more practice. Select the ones you think work well and
throw out the ones that don't. In this video,
we've looked at the topic of Small Talk. We've examined some examples of it and discussed how it is
relevant to networking. Next, we'll play a game with appropriate
phrases from a conversation.