Hello, in this video, we'll be looking
at asking for clarification and repetition in an interview. We will discuss what asking for
clarification and repetition means, and give some examples of each. Clarification is when you don't
understand something the interviewer. So you ask him or her to make it clear. Repetition is when you ask
the interviewer to repeat or say again something that they said. In a job interview, there may be times
when you won't understand every question an interviewer asks you. This may be especially true
if you're doing an interview in a language that is not your first,
such as English. It is perfectly normal that
sometimes you won't understand everything the interviewer asks you. You shouldn't panic. Good interviewees have
the same difficulty, but they usually have some strategies or
ways of working around a difficulty that allows them to better understand
what the interviewer is asking. Asking for clarification and
repetition are two such strategies. Let's imagine the interviewer just
asked you the following question. Could you tell me what kind of skills
you might bring to this position? Now, let's say you don't
understand the question. We're going to look at three
useful expressions you can use to either ask the interviewer for
clarification or repetition. The first expression is, I'm sorry,
I didn't understand your question. Could you repeat that please? The interviewee begins by apologizing for not understanding what was said,
I'm sorry. This shows politeness. The interviewee then goes on to say
that here she didn't understand. I didn't understand your question. Finally, the interviewee asks politely,
if the interviewer could repeat the question by saying,
could you repeat that please? Notice how could is used here,
which is a more polite or less direct way of asking for something. Could you repeat that, please? The second expression is, I'm not
quite sure I understood you correctly. Did you mean? In this case,
the interviewee is making sure that he or she understands the question
the interviewer just asked. The interviewee might say, I'm not
quite sure I understood you correctly. Did you mean what type of
qualifications will I use in this job? The interviewer will usually say yes or
no and then give more explanation. So the interviewer might say actually, no I was asking what kind of skills
might you bring you to this position. Notice how the interviewee
first uses the expression, I'm not quite sure I
understood you correctly. The interviewee could have said,
I didn't understood you. But, I'm not quite sure I understood
you correctly is more polite and therefore sounds better. Let's look at one final expression. If I understand you correctly,
you're asking. Again, the interviewee uses a more
polite expression rather than saying, I don't understand you, which could
sound too direct to the interviewer. If I understand you correctly, you're asking me what kind of
skills I will bring to this job. The interviewer might then say,
yes that's correct. In this video, we have looked
at ways of asking an interviewer to repeat or
clarify information in a question. These are useful expressions you can
use if you don't fully understand what the interviewer is asking you. Next, we will play a game to practice
appropriate interview questions.