Hello, and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In the first video, we talked about why evolution by natural
selection was mathematically inevitable. There is no way to avoid having evolution
by natural selection if certain very simple conditions were met. We also talked about one famous example
of evolution by natural selection. That of color change in the peppered
moth in Great Britain and other parts of the world. Now it may surprise you to learn
after seeing that video that in many parts of the world, people don't
believe in the truth of evolution. Let's talk a little bit about some of
the historical challenges there and some of the issues that people are facing,
particularly in the United States. Now one of the most famous examples
of opposition to evolution is the Scopes Monkey Trial from the 1920s. In the United States state of Tennessee,
they passed a law called the Butler Act which made teaching evolution
in public schools unlawful. Now one teacher challenged this law. His name was John Scopes. He went into his classroom,
taught evolution in a very public forum. He was taken to court as a result of this,
and in a very highly publicized trial, as you can see from some of these headlines,
evolution trial opened by prayer. Judge has a Bible. It brought out all the people who were
against evolution on one side and for the teaching of evolution
on the other side. Now, John Scopes did
actually violate the law. As a result of that,
he was actually found guilty. However, trivializing this law and
showing how ridiculous it was, he was fined a mere $100,
which was not that much money. So this was actually a big victory for
the pro teaching evolution community. Now the prosecutor, the person who was
basically trying to send him to jail, was William Jennings Bryan. Who had previously run for
President of the United States. He was extremely disappointed. He lost his chance to give a very
impassioned speech against evolution. So this was a big victory. Now you may be thinking,
well this was 100 years ago. Does this kind of thing
still actually happen today? The answer is yes, and
not just in the United States either. Here are a few examples from
just the last couple of years, long after the Scopes monkey trial,
of course. The first one is from the United States
state of Tennessee, Livingston Parish. Creation science genesis-School system
looks into teaching anti-evolution. It's just from a few years ago. Even more recently, this is a case
from outside the United States. South Korea surrenders
to creationist demands. And very importantly,
look at what they are saying. Publishers are set to remove examples of
evolution from high-school textbooks. So they're actually, they actually have
this in their standard curriculum, they're basically wanting to take it out,
to remove these examples from it. There's a lot of public pressure to not
talk about evolution in public schools. You see the same thing in the United
States state of Kansas headed for another debate over evolution. They say another debate, because there
was a very highly publicized debate by one school board in
Kansas from around 1999. Well, again, there's a lot of variation when you
look across countries in the world. So let me show you results from a survey
that focuses, especially in this case, on European countries and
the United States, just so you can see a couple of comparisons. So this was a survey done in 2005. The red bars indicate people who when
asked about the truth of evolution said that evolution is quote false. The blue bars are people who when asked
about the truth of evolution said evolution was true. So when you look at this, in Iceland we
have very high acceptance of evolution. About 80% say it's true, maybe 10%
say it's false and 10% are uncertain. As you see looking at a lot of
the Western European countries, France, United Kingdom, again, fairly high
acceptance of the truth of evolution. Down near the very bottom,
we have the United States here, where about 40% of people surveyed
said that evolution was true. Fewer than half said evolution was true. This is one of the foundational
pieces of biology, and less than half of people
surveyed said it was even true. 40% also said it was false, and
20% said they were uncertain. This is really shocking, and again, there's a lot of variation
in other countries. I'm sure if you survey other places,
you will find several countries that have even lower acceptance
of the truth of evolution, but again you'll see a lot of
variation place to place. You may be thinking well,
2005 was quite a time ago. Maybe things have improved. Nope, 2009, we have even lower
acceptance of the truth of evolution. So why are we still talking about this? This is the question I
want to pose to you. Within the scientific community, there is absolutely no debate
about the truth of evolution. You often hear politicians say teach the
kids the controversy and let them decide. Well there is no controversy to teach
at least from a scientific standpoint. There is no question whatsoever
about the truth of evolution. The only debates that
exist about evolution are about the relative importance of
different forces on particular cases. So did the shape of my ear evolve more
by an action of natural selection, or did it evolve more by random forces? That's the only kind
of debates that exist. There is definitely no debate about
the truth that evolution has happened, or the truth that evolution by natural
selection has happened many, many times. In this context,
evolution is both a theory and a fact. And this may sound confusing because
people sometimes use the word theory very loosely. And it's not the way to use
it in a scientific setting. So what do we mean when we
say a scientific theory? What is a scientific theory? Well a scientific theory is what
happens when you make a hypothesis, which is an educated guess. And then verify and
accept it as true through testing. All right, so you have a hypotheses, which
is basically an educated guess, all right? And then you test it. And if you test it and it supports
the argument that you're making, then it becomes accepted as true and
accepted as a theory. In fact, hypotheses have to be accepted
multiple times by detached groups of researchers before you can really consider
it a general theory that people accept. At that point it'd still be far below
the level of acceptance for evolution. There's so much evidence for it. We'll talk about that more
in the subsequent videos. Interestingly, although there's a lot of
criticism about evolution as a theory, people call it just a theory quite often,
particularly in the United States. There are a lot of other theories out
there that don't get this sort of response. Here are a couple of examples for you. Gravity is just a theory. Whereas if I get up and
stand on my desk and jump, I think you all are pretty certain
that I'm going to go down and not up. So it's a theory which there is a lot
of support for, just like evolution. Atoms up until recently
nobody had seen them, but we still had the atomic theory and
we've seen what's happened from it. We go back far enough in time, and germs before people could actually
see them were a theory, right? People could argue the reasons for persons
getting sick is because of witchcraft. Rather than saying that there's
microorganisms that are transmitted from sick people through their breathing and
their sneezes to other people. So there's again this idea
that because it's a theory, it's not been proven yet, but in fact, evolution has been proven multiple times
by detached groups of researchers. And part of the resistance comes
from this appearance of design. That when you look at the world
around us things seem amazingly well suited to
the environment that their in. Here's an excerpt from Jerry Coin's
book Why Evolution is True, which is recommended for this class. Species seem intricately and almost
perfectly designed for living their lives. That's Jerry Coin by the way over there. This appearance of design is what
makes people think, okay this can't be from something impersonal like
evolution by natural selection, but there has to be something guiding it. But in fact, natural selection
causes this appearance of design. We'll talk about this more
a little bit later on. I encourage you, by the way, in the
meantime to look at this video on YouTube. This video shows the example
of the Lampsilis Mussel. This is this right here. You look at this right here,
next to the muscle. That is not a fish. That is actually part of the muscle. That is is a ruler that
sticks out from it, and the muscle waves it around
to draw in other fish. When other fish come,
it spits out its young into their gills. They clamp onto their gills and
develop inside the fish. So this is something that
seems amazing when you see it, but something that happened as
a result of natural selection. You may be wondering why
am I pushing this so hard? Why does it matter? How does studying evolution help humanity? This is the question I
want to pose to you. Now let me start this section by talking
briefly about one medical application. We'll come back to this topic for an
entire lecture later on in the semester. So one medical application where we can
see the action of evolution by natural selection is in what's happened
with antibiotic resistance. Back in the 1920s penicillin was
discovered to be an antibiotic chemical. That basically by taking
penicillin you could prevent infections from staph bacteria. This was amazing. And this was the reason this is pushed
in this particular slide here is because during World War II,
you could say thanks to penicillin, this injured soldier won't die from
staph infections, and he will come home. As a result of this, penicillin was
mass-produced first around 1943. It was the wonder drug. Things changed though
very shortly after that. In 1947, the first resistant strain
of staph was discovered that even when penicillin was applied to the
patient, the staph bacteria did not die. This was cause for some concern. That concern became much greater
very shortly after that. By 1950, 40% of staph isolates
were resistant to penicillin, 40%. That's almost half the time it didn't
matter if you took penicillin or not. By 1960, 80% of staph isolates
were resistant to penicillin. So you may be thinking to yourself,
when was the last time you had penicillin? Not any antibiotic, but
penicillin in particular. There's a high probability that
most of you watching this have not had it in the recent past. And the reason is, because nearly all staph bacteria isolates
out there are resistant to penicillin. How did this happen? Well, this happened because of the very
basic evolutionary principle of evolution by natural selection. In the original population of staph
bacteria, you had these blue ones. They weren't actually blue. I just did this for the picture. You had these blue ones which
were susceptible to penicillin. And when penicillin was applied,
they died. You had a very small fraction of red
ones which were actually resistant to penicillin. So when the antibiotic was applied,
tons of the people all over the world were taking it, sometimes when
they didn't need to take it. There was no competition for
the resistant strain. All the blue ones were killed off,
red ones there by itself, it was able to spread. And what's happened, this is more
like what the population of staph bacteria looks like in the world today. Virtually all the strains out
there are resistant to penicillin. The reason for this, and
the lesson to be learned here, is that antibiotics were, and
very often are still, overprescribed. By taking antibiotics
when you don't need them, you actually make the population of
staph in the world more resistant, and that makes it harder for the people
who actually do need the antibiotics. So only take antibiotics
when you really need them. Don't take them as a precautionary thing,
it's very bad. Another problem from antibiotics that
I want to introduce briefly, and this also has to do with evolution. Humans have co-evolved with many bacteria. We actually have bacteria that
synthesize our vitamin K. This is an essential vitamin for us, and bacteria within our
bodies synthesized this. They also help us to
resist invading organisms. Bacteria within our bodies help us
resist invading fungi, for example. Many of the women out there will know
that when you're taking antibiotics, there much more likely to
get a yeast infection. Again it's because your
killing off the good bacteria. The ones that are helping
you resist that yeast. So, more generally,
antibiotics kill the good stuff too. The consequences from
this can be quite large. There was a 2011 study of
irritable bowel syndrome, what it shows here is that kids that had
no courses of antibiotics had a fairly low risk of irritable bowel syndrome. As you had more and more antibiotic
treatments, you had a higher and higher risk of irritable bowel syndrome. So again, antibiotics kill off
the good stuff, the reason that we have good bacteria is because we have
co-evolved with our bacteria that we, over time, having developed this
mutualistic relationship with them. Now in the next couple of videos, I'll be talking about specific
cases of evidence for evolution. And examples that you can use to
talk with your friends who may not know about them thus far. So I hope you'll join us,
and thank you for coming.