Hello and welcome back to Introductions
to Genetics and Evolution. In the previous videos we've
been trying to distinguish what fraction of phenotypic variance. How much of the variation you
see in traits like height, skin color etc.,
come from genetics versus the environment. In this video I'll introduce you to what's
refered to as the Breeder's Equation. But first,
let me recap a couple of points. Now the trait variance that we are
interested in, so this is any trait that you can be looking at, such as height,
eye color, or anything that you can quantify in some way, has some genetic
fraction and some environmental fraction. And we can simpilize this
with a very simple formula. VP which is the phenotypic
variance is equal to VG. That's the fraction of the phenotypic
variance that is genetic, plus VE, which is the fraction of the phenotypic
variance that comes from the environment. And again, we want to quantify how
much is genetic versus environmental. The concept I introduced last
time was that of heritability. That is the proportion of the total
phenotypic variance, that is genetic. Now this is important, because this
genetic component is the component that can respond to selection, whether that
selection is natural or artificial. Now, again, this is a proportion,
it ranges from 0, meaning that all the variation
is environmental, to 1 meaning that all the variation
you see is genetic in origin. Now we talked about means
of identifying this before. But a new means I want us to start looking
at here is in response to selection. Now this picture shows several students. The ones in white are girls. The ones in black are boys. The average height in this population,
as you can see, is about 5 foot 7 inches. Now let's imagine that we take the circled
individuals here, that guy and that girl, and let's say they had a bunch of kids. What would we expect? How tall would those kids be? Now one possibility is that they would be,
on average, about 6' 0", just like their parents. That's a possibility. The other possibility is they
might be 5' 7" on average, just like the overall population. Now, these are two very
different outcomes. Now, if height was purely
determined by the environment, then we might expect this latter one. We might expect that
the offspring would look like the original population because it
didn't really matter who the parents were. In contrast, if height was purely genetic,
then we might expect the kids to look just like their parents because they
inherit the genes from their parents. Well, we can calculate
heritability by looking at this response to artificial selection. By looking at individuals who are not
representative of the original population, breeding them and seeing what
happens in terms of their offspring. So let's use corn,
one of my favorite examples. Let's say you're looking at corn height. Now let's say corn height
averages around 5 feet. Okay, so the population you're looking at, that's the average height
of plants of corn. Let's say you select a group of 7
foot tall corn and you breed them. Now if the offspring of these 7 foot
tall plants averaged 7 feet also. So you looked at a lot
of individual offspring, on average they ended up having
a distribution look something like this. Then that suggested the variance
that we see here is purely genetic. The heritability is 1, because you see the offspring inherit the
traits of their parents completely, okay? In contrast, if the height of the 7 foot
plants were actually 5 feet instead. So, instead, the offspring would be more
like this, then that suggests the variance in height is purely environmental or
a heritability of 0. So this was a heritability of 0. I showed you previously
the heritability of 1. What would happen if the height of the
offspring of the 7 foot plants averaged 6? What might you expect heritability to be? Well it's a very simple answer. Well, 5 feet meant it was 0. 7 feet meant it was 1. So, 6 foot would unsurprisingly mean
the heritability is 0.5, right? Or we can do the same thing and
divide this up. That again if they averaged 5 feet,
heritability was 0. If they averaged 6 feet it's 0.5. In between,
if they're 5.5 feet it would be 0.25. Essentially what we're looking at is, we're looking at the point from
where we started which was 5 feet. That was the starting population average. We're looking at the average of the
selected group, which in this case was 7. And we're looking and
seeing the offspring. How far did they get from
the starting population average to the selected population average? A fraction of the way they make it is
the heritability, and that is true. And that is actually how you can estimate the genetic component to
whatever trait you're looking at. Now let me give you an analogy that might
make this a little bit easier to see. This is a map of a subsection of
the state of North Carolina where I live. So I live over here in Durham,
North Carolina. That's where Duke University is. Now let's say I was
trying to go from Durham, North Carolina along this interstate. This is I-85 I think, I can't remember. Let's say I was trying to go down
to Charlotte, North Carolina. Now, if you start in Durham, you're trying to get to Charlotte,
this is 150 miles away. That is similar to the selected group,
so the starting thing was here. The place you're trying
to get was over here, but let's say I only got to the city of
Greensboro, I only got 50 miles from here. So what fraction of the way did
I make it to my destination? Well, I was trying to go 150 miles,
I only made it 50 miles. So, I made it a third of the way there. Well, that's the same concept when
you look at artificial selection in estimating heritability from it. That, you're starting with
a population average of 5, you're trying to get to this average,
cuz this is the selected group. So these are the 7 foot tall corn. So, the distance I was trying
to go here was from 5 to 7. So, I was trying to go 2. In fact, I only got 1. This is the new population's or
the next generation's average which is 6. So I started with 5, was trying to get
to 7, but I only made it as far as 6. So therefore, the heritability
in this case would be 1 over 2. So 1, which is the response to selection,
over 2 which is the selected group. So in this sense we can redefine
heritability from one generation selection experiment, heritability can be
defined as how far you got, or the response to selection
after one generation. Relative to how far you
were trying to get, or basically how intensely
you were selecting. So heritability can be
defined as R over S. The reason we can do this, is because
R is dictated by the genetic variance. Whereas S is a combination of genetic,
and environmental variance. Because that's what was in
the original population there, right? Because again, as I mentioned earlier, the response to selection can
only be through genetic variance. Now again, this measures the fraction of
phenotypic variation that is genetic, because this is equivalent
to Vg/(Vg + Ve). Or, as we said before, Vg/Vp. So let me give you
a sample problem to try. Let's say you're selecting for
plumper turkeys to have a nice dinner. Let's say you start with a population of
turkeys, the average weight 25 pounds. And let's say you select turkeys with
an average weight of 45 pounds from this overall population. Right, so in the population
let's draw how this might look. Here's the distribution
of weights of turkey. Here's your 25 pound turkey. There's a subset that are 45 pounds,
so you select this group. Now let's say the offspring of these
45 pound turkeys weigh 40 pounds. So the offspring maybe like here. What is the heritability
of weight in these turkeys? Try this problem. Welcome back, I hope that wasn't
a very difficult problem. Again we're starting with 25 pound
turkeys, we're selecting for 45 pound turkeys, and the offspring
that we got were 40 pound turkeys. So what is first the intensity
of selection here? Well, we're trying to go from 25 to 45. So in this case S = 20 because that
is the difference between 45 and 25. The response, in this case we
started at 25 and we only got to 40. In this case that is 15,
which comes from 40- 25. So R / S would be equal to 15 / 20. In this case would be 0.75, so the
heritability in this case is fairly high. That 75% of the variation that
we see is genetic in origin. Now, I should remind you these
are not perfect predictions. This is just giving you
an estimate of heritability. And this comes back to the points that I
raised at the very end of the last video. The amount of environmental variance
is not necessarily constant. Some populations may have more or less
genetic variance than other populations. This is what you saw for
your turkeys and your farm. In another farm you may
get a different outcome, and you have to remember
what you're calculating. You're looking at the fraction of total phenotypic variance in the population
you're studying that is genetic. So that is the Vg over Vg plus V. But again, this is very important and this
is something that's not only utilized just in the context of artificial selection,
but this is important for both artificial and natural selection. With artificial selection,
and these are very, very similar concepts, the breeder
is choosing desirable traits and has organisms with the most extreme
desirable traits breed to do it. So let's say for example you're trying
to select for friendlier collies. You take your two friendliest collies and
you breed them. The same sort of thing happens
with natural selection, that particular traits will facilitate
survival or reproduction and organisms with the most extreme such
traits end up having the most offspring. So the same principle applies. And again the response to either kind
of selection, whether it's natural or artificial is always going to be
in terms of the genetic variance. Well, thank you very much. I hope that was helpful.