Hello. And welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. We're at a transition
point in the class now. We've already gone over a lot
of basic transmission genetics. We've talked about things
like recombination rate. We've talked about genetic mapping,
things like that. What you'll start to see now,
over the next couple of videos, is, we'll still be talking about
topics related to genetics, but we'll gradually be getting
significantly more evolutionary. And we'll talk about some things
having to do with evolution, starting with today's talk. Today we'll be looking at
the different contributions from genetics versus the environment,
two various traits. Basically, how do we tell if each of
the two contribute to a particular trait? How do we tell that some trait
has a genetic contribution versus an environmental one? Well, the media often portrays this
genetics versus environment, or nature versus nurture, as they like to
say it, as some sort of raging debate. In fact, I've had people on airplanes ask
me, where do you stand on this debate? There is no stance. That's just ridiculous. It's nearly always somewhat of both. But we do want to able to actually
identify that there is a genetic component or an environmental component because
there are a small number of traits that only have one. Let me start with this example. This is a picture from my backyard. These are some corn plants that I was
growing right next to our deck there, as you can see. Now what I did here to make it a little
bit easier to see is I put these white bars, as you can see here, just depicting
the size of the corn plant next to it. So you see I have some that are about
this tall, some that are about this tall. And right next to the deck I have
some significantly shorter one. So why is that? Why do you think that
there's this difference? It's not just one corn plant, there's a bunch of them that are all about
the same height, a bunch of them there are all about the same height, a bunch of
them there are all around the same height. Do you think I split up the seeds and
put all the tall corn over here, the medium corn over here,
and the short corn over here? Probably not. Do you think I watered them differently? No, they were all pretty
much watered the same. Well, if you think about it for
a second, the answer is kind of obvious. These corn plants out here were
getting a lot more sunshine, whereas these corn plants
were getting a lot less. Cuz as you can imagine,
as the sun was going over, all of them were still getting sun,
like it's way over here. These ones are still getting sun, but the ones up against the deck
are not getting any sun. So, there clearly is some sort
environmental component to this corn but how do we quantify this, and more
fundamentally, why do people even care? Why do people want to quantify
whether there's a genetic versus environmental component? Well there's a lot of reasons,
as you'll see later in the class you'll see that we want to be able to
predict evolutionary change. Right? And evolutionary change requires that
there's some sort of genetic component. You can't have natural selection or
evolution by natural selection, unless there is some hereditary basis
to the traits that are being selected. Okay? This is often also used in animal and
crop breeding. So let's say for example you're
a farmer and you want to breed for a corn that grows tall. Now let's say that there is basically
no genetic component to it. Do you want to spend a lot of energy
trying to select when there's in fact going to be no response at all? Well let's say there's no
environmental component. Do you want to spend a lot more
resources for excellent fertilizer and things like that when
it's not going to matter? It's all going to grow to
the same height anyway. No! Basically, you want to know
this sort of information so you can spend the least amount of effort
or energy possible for the best yield. This is true for
both animal breeding and crop breeding. You want to know if
the environment matters, and you want to know if it helps to pick
parents that have particular traits. This is also very important
in the context of medicine. Let's say for example you're a doctor and
somebody comes to you and says, my mom and dad had peptic ulcers. Am I likely to get them? Basically is there some sort of genetic
predisposition to peptic ulcer. You want to be able to have
an answer to these things and this is where this kind
of work is very useful. So, let me emphasize again,
does not appear dichotomy. This is very rarely an either or question,
but there's usually some of both. However, one may contribute
way more than the other. So, something like, for
example, eye color. Yes, there's probably some small
environmental component to that, but there's a very strong genetic
component to eye color. That I could lie in the sun
staring at the sun forever and my eyes would not turn blue. [LAUGH] Something like that. Similarly, HIV status. Yes, there are some
genotypes that are slightly predisposed to being less likely
to getting infected with HIV. But there's obviously a huge environmental
component that your behavior is very likely to affect how
likely you are to get HIV. So let's dive into this. First, do genetics contribute? The way people usually identify
some sort of genetic contribution, and I mentioned this in the beginning
of the genetics section, is there's some sort of
parent-offspring resemblance. That this could indicate that
genetics are important because people who are related tend to look
more similar to each other than to just somebody at random from the population. However, this is not a perfect measure. And part of the reason for that is
something we'll come back to a little bit later on in this set of videos,
but not this video in particular. It's that parents and offspring often
share a part of their environment too. So how do we separate these two things? How do we distinguish? Well I'm gonna show you
a couple of different means. In the first part here I'll talk
about resemblance between relatives. And I'll use examples of identical
versus fraternal twins or monozygotic versus dizygotic
twins as an example. I'll use that just as an illustration and
then we'll come to the more meaty parts which is common garden experiments or
reciprocal transplant experiments. And those use the same principles
as the sort of twin examples. You'll see this in just a moment. The idea here is that we want to
separate genetics from environment. We want to keep one side constant and vary
the other and see if there is an effect. For keeping the environment constant,
we vary the genetics and we see an effect when there must
be some genetic contribution. If we keep the genetics constant, we vary
the environment and we see some sort of effect on the phenotype then there
must be an environment component. That's the basic principle. So, looking at the two
types of twins I mentioned, monozygotic which are identical. These are ones that came from a single
sperm and egg that then separated out and they shared a single placenta. These are genetically exactly the same,
okay. Dizygotic, or fraternal twins, are actually no different from
any other brother and sister. They are separate sperm and
egg fertilized. You can never have identical twins that
were different sexes because you can't have different sexes that have
exactly the same genotype. Famous example of some twins
are the Olsen twins here. They by the way are fraternal rather
than identical, just so you know. Now we could leverage this difference
between monozygotic and dizygotic twins. We predict, if there's a genetic
component to some trait, so let's say you're looking at height. If there's a genetic component to
the trait the monozygotic twins should be more similar to each other in that trait,
such as height, than dizygotic twins. On average, if you look across monozygotic
twins they should be very, very similar. Dizygotic might be a little
bit more different, because the dizygotic twins don't
have exactly the same genotype. They have some different genes. Whereas the monozygotic have
exactly the same genes. And we're assuming these twins are
basically reared in the same environment, or close enough,
There is no particular difference. Like if you were having kids, if you
have monozygotic twins versus dizygotic twins you probably don't
treat them any differently. You treat them the same
because they're your kids. The way we measure this,
the way we measure how similar or different you are is using correlations. So, using correlations and
traces, we do this. This gives you some measure of how
well traits match between groups. I know some of you may have had
a statistics background and some of you may not. So, for those of you who already know some
statistics, I apologize for this review. Correlations are given a numeric score,
which is often labeled in r. And that r ranges from
-1 to 0 to positive 1. And what this does is it indicates
how closely one predicts the other. So let's say for
example you have a perfect positive match. That would be an r of 1. So an example of this would be your height
in centimeters to your height in inches. One perfectly predicts the other. You have this absolutely perfectly
linear correlation between the two. In contrast, let's look at one
that's not quite so strong. Here's one. Let's say you compared your
height to your brother's height. You may see something more
like an r of 0.7, where on average if you have a tall brother you are
likely to be tall, on average, if you have a short brother you're likely to be short,
but it's not this perfect correlation. There's some individuals
who have a tall brother but are a little bit on the short side,
and things like that. So it's not perfectly predicted. And again, in this case,
some of this may be from genetics and some of this may be from
shared environment. That's why you do see some sort
of shared association here. Now let's go a little bit further. Let's imagine there's no correlation. You may see this in the context of
your height to your neighbor's height, your next door neighbor's height. You know it's quite possible that
you'll have some very short neighbors. You may have some very tall neighbors. But there's no reason to expect
that their height is any more or less like your height. So this would be a case
where the correlation is 0. And you may be wondering, well I've
only done this range from 0 to 1, what about the negative part? Well negative is when you have
literally a negative prediction such as daily high temperature to morning
rainfall in the month of April. That you may have a lot of rainfall
associated with low temperature, but as rainfall goes down your associate you
get a higher and higher temperature. Okay, so this would be an example
of a negative correlation or a negative 0.5 in this particular example. So I hope that gives you an illustration
of what I mean when I say correlations. So let's come back and use this. The prediction, as I've said before, is that if there's a genetic component
to a trait monozygotic twins should have a stronger correlation in
that trait than dizygotic twins, right? The monozygotic are the ones
that are genetically identical. Right?
And dizygotic ones have some different genes. We're assuming that the environment
is about the same in both. So what do we see with the data? Well if we look at correlations which
ones we often see this difference between monozygotic twins and
dizygotic twins. Here are a couple of examples. One is for IQ, or
the supposed intelligence coefficient. The monozygotic twins tend to score
very similarly on these tests. The correlation is 0.85. Whereas dizygotic twins
have a correlation of 0.42. This suggests there is a genetic
component to what is measured here as IQ. Same sort of thing for some diseases. When you look at gastroesophageal reflux
disease monozygotic twins have a 0.29, dizygotic twins have a 0.13. Again we see this higher association
when they are genetically the same than when they are genetically similar,
but not identical which means that there
is some sort of genetic component. There may be an environmental component. I should stress this. None of proved the absence of
an environmental component. All it shows is the presence
of a genetic component. I should stress that. Now, since this didn't prove the absence
of an environmental component, how do we look at that? Well, what we can do there is keep
the genetic relations constant, but vary the environment. What you do is you look at
monozygotic twins reared together versus monozygotic twins
that were reared apart. And your prediction is
that monozygotic twins reared together should have a higher
correlation in these traits than monozygotic twins reared apart if
there's an environmental component. The reason is, those monozygotic twins
reared together have exactly the same genes and the same environment, or
very, very, very similar environment. Whereas monozygotic twins reared
apart have exactly the same genes but somewhat of a different environment. Now this has been done quite a bit,
especially in the context of psychology, but in other areas as well. So here's some results. Looking at body mass index, or BMI, monozygotic twins reared
together have a correlation of 0.74. In contrast monozygotic twins reared
apart have a correlation of 0.70. This suggests there may some
environmental component, but it is surprisingly very small. Very small, surprisingly small
environmental component. You make this is unexpected for
something like body mass index. But in fact, for this particular study,
that's what they found. In contrast, for verbal ability
monozygotic twins reared together had a quotient of 0.76, whereas
monozygotic twins reared apart had 0.51. So this suggests a very strong
environmental component to verbal ability. Now we can again do the same thing
with monozygotic versus dizygotic. So looking at this, this showed
a strong environmental component. This also shows a strong
genetic component. Because again, the monozygotic
together versus dizygotic together, together it means
the environment's the same. Mono versus di is changing the genetics. In this case, we see a pretty
large genetic component and a moderately large environmentally
component for the same trait. Again, seeing this difference doesn't
necessarily mean that there's, it doesn't mean the absence
of a genetics component, it just means the presence
of an environmental one. Okay? So again, what we try to do is we try to
control for environment, vary genetics and see if there's an effect. Or control for genetics and
vary the environment and see if there's [INAUDIBLE]. Well, the same principles are done when
you're looking at animals or plants and things like that. And not involving mono and
dizygotic twins. And, in fact,
these have been done quite some time. Let me show you some classic work. This is from the 1930s,
work done by Clausen, Keck, and Hiesey. And here were interested
in these differences among plant forms identified
from different elevations. So they got some plant forms, as you
can see on this elevational gradient, from Timberline, which is very high in the
Sierra Nevada of California, from Mather, which is moderately high in elevation,
and from Stanford, which has a very low elevation,
just above sea level. And what they found is that the plants,
these are the same species, looked very different in
these different forms. That at high elevation they tended be kind
of thin, sparse, not particularly bushy. Here's a color photograph
of the high elevation form. As you got to lower elevations, you got
this much bigger, bushier form down there. Is it genetics, or is it environment? Well, they pioneered a set of work
that was extraordinarily influential. So, one thing they tried were
these common garden experiments. These had actually been done by
other researchers in the past. But they applied this to these
particular plants in California. Essentially what they do for this is they grow plants obtained from
different places in a single environment. So the idea here is they're trying
to keep the environment constant. By getting these plants
from different places, these likely have different genes, right? Because they're coming
from different places, they likely have
a different genetic makeup. So if the form difference between,
say, the high elevation plants and the low elevation plants,
well it's all environmental, right? If you grow them in the same place,
they should all look the same. In contrast, if this form
difference between the tall and short plants was all genetic, then the
plants should look like quite different. Even if it's partially genetic,
they should look quite different. This is very similar to the concept of
mono versus dizygotic twin studies because again, we're using unrelated plants,
so they have different genes, but looking at them in a constant environment. Well, what did they see? In fact, they found there was a form
difference apparent even when grown in the same environment. So these are ones from the species
potentilla gracilis and grown in one spot in Mathers, so this is that
intermediate immediate elevation spot. They found quite a big difference in form. This suggests this form difference
does have a genetic component. It does not prove there was
no environmental component. It only proves there is
a genetic component. Okay?
Well how do we do the other half of this? Well, the other thing you can try is
what's referred to as a reciprocal transplant experiment. In this case, you grow plant forms
obtained from a single environment. So since they're from the same place we're
assuming the genetics is fairly constant. And you grow them in several
different environments. So you are taking all of these
ones that have the same form and you are growing them in
different environments. So maybe you take it from Mather and
grow it in Timberline, in Mather, and in Standford, for example. If some of the form difference
is environmental then they should in fact look different. In fact,
if the form difference was truly genetic, then all the plants would still
look exactly the same, right? Cuz they're all derived from
that same place, correct? This is the same concept as these
twins reared together versus apart. That we're using the same
genetic makeup and we're varying the environment
in which the plants are grown. And in fact,
with this they did still see an effect. The form difference for the same type grown in different
environments was still apparent. This is showing potentilla glandulosa,
and this is grown at Stanford, Mather, and Timberline. And you know what again? The Timberline ones are quite small. The Stanford ones are much bigger and
bushier. This is just this form difference
does have environmental component. Now, everything I've shown you so far is
how to tell is there a genetic component, yes or no. Is there an environmental component,
yes or no. And remember, just because we say yes to one does not
mean you're saying no to the other, because quite often, as you saw with
these examples, there is some of both. Now what you probably
want to do is to quantify how much of the variation that you
see is genetic versus environmental. Well that we'll come to in the next unit.