Hello, and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In the previous videos, we talked about
the general principles of natural selection as applied to single loci or
as applied to phenotypes. What I wanted to do in this video
is to present to you some elegant case studies and
examples of natural selection. Cases where looking at animals or plants in the field,
we tend to see these observations that seem to be best explained by
the action of natural selection. So let's go ahead and get started. I have three general categories of
things that we'll be talking about. First, we'll look at some
case studies of mimicry. Mimicry, as you may know
from the term itself, suggests imitating something
else in appearance. We'll look at variation in space and
time within a species or across species, and we'll look at the
principle of sacrifice for family members. Why does it happen? Evolution by natural selection
isn't always ruthless [LAUGH], as some may have you think. So, looking at mimicry to start with. Mimicry, again, it just means the organisms
evolving to resemble one another. Now when can this adaptive? The simplest time this
would be adaptive is if the model has some sort
of warning coloration. Basically, if you want to look like
something that is scary, that makes it so other things are less likely to threaten
you or to eat you or things like that. So if what's referred to as the model, the
thing that you're evolving to look like, has a warning coloration and
is actively avoided, then your appearing like the model species will make it less
likely that you will be harassed or eaten. I think this is not a particularly
good example here of a dog trying to look like a skunk, and it's
clearly not evolutionary, but nonetheless, let's look at some real examples. There's two general types of mimicry. The first one we'll talk about
is called Batesian mimicry. This is the case where the mimic is not
dangerous, but the model is dangerous. In this case again, it's useful for
the mimic to look like the model because others will fear it or
avoid it for whatever reason. So we have here example of
the non-venomous kingsnake, which as you see, looks very,
very similar to the venomous coral snake. We have an example here of a fly
that looks very much like a wasp. And wasps, of course, can sting you,
and that's very painful, and therefore they're typically avoided. This fly however has no stinger, but
it looks so much like a wasp that it tends to be avoided, and
therefore its fitness is higher. In both of these cases, they are more
likely to eventually survive and have more offspring because they are less
likely to be harassed and/or eaten. This is a really elegant picture. This is a caterpillar that, as you see, looks a lot like snake when it
puts its rear up like that. So this is Batesian mimicry, the case
where the mimic is not dangerous, but the model is. Let me show you a different one. This is Müllerian mimicry. In this case, this is a lot of dangerous
species, or multiple dangerous species, evolving to look like one another. In that sense,
they derive an advantage from each other. So what we have here, these are all, the top row here is all
from the species Heliconius melpomene. This is a nice tropical butterfly. The lower ones are all Heliconius erato. What you see here is this melpomene
looks a lot like this erato, this melpomene looks like this erato,
etc., etc., etc. Now, importantly, why am I showing
you all these different pictures? In each of these cases, the vertical
group here are from one local population. So in one particular population,
melpomene look like this, and the erato look like this. In another population, the melpomene look
like this, and the erato look like this. It's very dramatic, that within
each of these local populations, they've evolved to look like each other
even though they are different from their own species in other populations. And again, in this case they derive
the advantage from each other. Because imagine if a bird
eats a Heliconius erato and it has a bad digestive reaction to it. It's less likely to eat any more erato,
but it's also less likely
to eat any melpomene. They all derive this mutual advantage. In the case of Batesian mimicry,
the advantage is only to the mimic. In this case, the advantage is for
all the models to come together. It's a really elegant case of
natural selection, don't you think? So moving on. I wanna talk a little bit about
variation across space and time. Now there are a couple of things that are
often referred to as ecogeographic rules. So these ecogeographic rules are patterns
of variation either within a species or across a species group that tend
to correlate with geography. So for example, having a particular
trait in cool environments, but not having that trait
in warm environments. And when you see this pattern over and
over again, either within species or across species, you know within
a particular species group, that's indicative that there's
some reason behind this. That there's some adaptive value to
having a particular trait in the cold but not in the warm. So one of these is referred
to as Bergmann's rule. This was named after the German biologist
Bergmann in the 19th century, who observed that animals in general tend to be bigger
in cold environments or in high latitudes. Now his classic work on
this in house sparrows, but it's been seen across and
within various other species groups too. Now why might this be? Well, again, as you're larger,
you're increasing your volume quite a bit, but you're not increasing your
surface area at the same rate. So therefore you should be
better able to retain heat. Now this is just one possible explanation. We're not positive that this is
the cause for it, nor are we positive in every individual case that this
is a result of natural selection. But we see this pattern over and
over again, and it's suggestive of natural selection,
and it makes sense. So we'll come back to this sort of
principle a little bit later on in this class as well. So Bergmann's rule, again, is that animals
tend to be larger in cold environments or in high latitudes. A similar rule is Allen's rule, is that animals tend to have shorter
appendages in cold environments. Now why would you do that? Why would you have shorter
appendages in cold environments? Again, think of it in the context of
surface area, that if you have long, lanky arms [LAUGH], then you might be
losing more heat in a cold environment. In contrast, if you have short, little stubby arms, then you're
not gonna be losing so much heat. So one classic example of this
that's been cited repeatedly is in the context of the ears of the polar
bear compared to the ears of other bears. Again, shorter appendages
in colder environments. Now interestingly,
we see this with respect to bills or beaks in birds as well. So beaks and bills, as you can imagine,
do lose some heat, and this is a thermal graph to show you that they actually do
have heat within them that can be lost. And this graph here on the right shows
various different species groups. These are the lines in the graphs,
various different species groups, and in each case you tend to see
this correlation with latitude, where at higher latitudes,
the bill size tends to be smaller. At lower latitudes,
the bill size tends to be larger. Again, consistent with what you
would expect from evolution by natural selection. The last one that I'll mention here,
though there are others as well, is referred to as Gloger's rule, that animals tend to be more
heavily pigmented in high humidity. Now, this is generally or typically
true near the equator, and this has been observed particularly in various
bird species such as song sparrows. In those cases, it's possibly
related to bacterial activity, though again we're not certain. But again, this is another ecogeographic
rule where we see it over and over again. It's been suggested to be true
potentially in humans as well, but again, the evidence is not perfect in
this regard so we don't know. Nonetheless, all these ecogeographic
rules are cases where it looks like the action of natural selection has been
present because we see these same patterns over and
over again with respect to geography. And you wouldn't expect
this by random chance. Why would it always, or why would it
typically be that the cold environments have the larger animals, just by chance? We don't think that's true. Now I'm talking about this so
far with respect to phenotypes, but you see the same thing
sometimes with respect to alleles, in cases where we can look
at the alleles directly. Drosophila pseudoobscura has a set of
alleles on its third chromosome, and in this video, I'll focus on one
that's referred to as arrowhead, or in this case abbreviated AR. This is a species that I actually
conduct research on as well, but we'll be talking about the classic
work by Dobzhansky from the 1930s and 40s all the way through
his passing in the 1970s. One of the things that Theodosius
Dobzhansky observed was a correlation with altitude, not latitude this time but
altitude, how high a population is, and the allele frequencies of arrowhead. So one of the places he studied was
in California, and he found that at low altitudes, like here in Jacksonville,
arrowhead tended to be pretty rare. But as you went higher and higher in altitude, you tended to get
more and more of this arrowhead allele. Interestingly now, he did some laboratory
experiments where he varied the humidity, and in those cases again, as he
changed the humidity to match what you would observe in low altitude populations,
arrowhead became rare. When he changed it to match high altitude
populations, it became more common. And the same thing also happens
with respect to latitude. So this is quite striking, where all these different sources of
evidence are supporting the same idea that there is some selective benefit
to the arrowhead allele at environments similar to what you would
see in high altitude or in high latitude. Now, this was true with respect to
geography, but remember I said before, this was space and time. You see the same thing
looking over time as well. Remember now, Drosophila species are,
they breed very quickly. Drosophila pseudoobscura has its
generation time in the lab of three to four weeks, so you have many
generations over the course of the year. So there's lots of opportunity for natural selection to change
the abundance of alleles over seasons. So he collected Drosophila pseudoobscura
from this place called Mather, CA, just outside of
Yosemite National Park, in 1946 and 1947. And what he found was early summer,
he tended to find a lot of arrowhead. As you got later into the summer, as it was warmer,
you tended to see a decrease in arrowhead. So you see this a little bit in 1946, but
you see it much more strikingly in 1947, that arrowhead gets less abundant
as it gets hotter each year. Remember, this is a slightly high altitude
too, so that's why June is actually still a little bit on the cool side
in that particular area. So again, the abundance of
the arrowhead allele decreases from spring to fall each year, and
then it comes back the following spring. Very dramatic. So this was again a case of
variation across space and time, consistent with evolution
by natural selection. The last principle I wanted to briefly
touch on was this concept of sacrifice for family members, or
it's often referred to as kin selection. So why does this happen? Why do you sacrifice yourself
to help your family members, or why do some animals do this? They'll often sacrifice to help
others if they are relatives. Now Darwin, as with most things,
had some ideas on this. And he pointed out in his Origin of
Species book, selection may be applied to the family as well as to the individual,
and may thus gain the desired end. It's important to remember that you're
related to your family, so when you help your family, you're actually helping
the spread of your own alleles too. So let's look at this with respect
to some pictures and stuff. So let's say this is you, okay? This is you there, and
let's say that generally speaking, if you just were selfish and
helped yourself, you would have two kids. And let's say then on average, you pass
half your information to each daughter, and therefore your alleles live on. Half goes to this daughter,
half goes to that daughter. On average, you've reproduced yourself. There may be particular alleles that
were lost, or some that you have that are now in two copies in the population,
but on average, it's passed on. Passing on nothing is clearly bad, if you were just to sacrifice yourself for
nothing, clearly that's not advantageous. So,let's look at this third option. Let's say that now you have four sisters. You share half your genetic information
with each sister, assuming you're diploid, which I assume you all
are who are watching this. So each of these has already
half of your genetic material. Now, you didn't make your sisters. They were made by your parents,
but let's say they're there. Now, let's say each of your sisters
has the potential to be selfish, and they're going to have two kids each. With each of these nieces, you share one
quarter of your genetic information. So, this one has one quarter
of your genetic information, this one has one-quarter of
your genetic information, etc. So let's assume that your help is critical to the reproduction of your sisters and
to the survival of your nieces. And you have the choice now where you
could either help these four sisters produce their kids, or
you could have your own kids. Which one is actually better for you? Well, counterintuitively,
if you help four sisters and die in the process, your alleles live on
twice as well as if you had kids yourself. Cuz in this case,
you've passed on two halves, 2 x 1/2, so you've passed on a total
of one copy of you. Here, you've passed on 8 x 1/4, or
essentially two copies of yourself. Now basically your alleles live on
better because you helped your sisters than if you were selfish and
helped yourself. Now there were some assumptions in this,
but nonetheless we do see this concept that sometimes it will be beneficial for
you to sacrifice yourself, or for an organism to sacrifice itself,
to help relatives reproduce. Now again,
this comes back to Darwin's quote here about selection may be
applied to the whole family. And the term for
this is kin selection, and it's the evolutionary strategy that favors
the reproductive success of an organism's relatives, even when at the cost of
the organism's own reproduction. There's a famous quote by JBS Haldane,
an evolutionary biologist. Now he was asked if he would give his life
to save a drowning brother, and he said, no, but I would save two brothers or
eight cousins. [LAUGH] Now of course it's a little bit
silly, but you see where this concept is, that if he saves two brothers and each of
them has half his genetic information, it's basically the same as saving himself. You may not feel like that
with respect to your brothers, but that's at least what
natural selection would favor. Now, there are some possible
examples of kin selection out there. Now one of them is with respect to
the Belding's ground squirrel alarm calls. Now these squirrels will, when they see
a threat, will stand up on a rock or something and make a little chip sound. And it's potentially dangerous to
themselves that they're doing this, because they're making themselves very
conspicuous to whatever the predator is or whatever the threat is that's imminent. Now, it's thought that this may have
evolved and spread to help relatives. And the reason for that is that females
do alarm calls more frequently when there are relatives around, rather when there
are no relatives around, and this is for one particular alarm call. So again, this is a possible
example of kin selection. So again, overall, what I wanted to do in this video is just
give you some case studies of natural selection in areas where it's been applied
to some interesting natural observations. First with respect to mimicry, so the
resemblance of something that is a threat. Looking at variation across space and
time, where often you see these repeated observations suggestive
of the action natural selection. And of course sacrifice for
family members or kin selection. Well, I hope you enjoyed this. Thanks so much.