Hello and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In the previous set of videos,
we talked about testing for whether populations fit the assumptions
of the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. At the very end of the last set of videos,
we looked particularly at one deviation from the Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium, that of the Wahlund effect. That is what happens when you sample
two populations simultaneously that differ in some of their
allele frequencies, and as a result of that, you see
an under-representation of heterozygotes. Let's recap that for just a moment, and then we'll move into how we can actually
leverage this Wahlund effect for actually quantifying differences between
populations in allele frequency. Now what we did last time is we tried to
calculate Hardy-Weinberg expectations and fit the Hardy-Weinberg expectations for
this MN blood type. I showed you data from Navajo and
Aborigines. Here's the data from the Navajo. So we first have our
raw genome type counts, from that we got the total
number of individuals. Using these two together, we then were able to calculate
the observed genotype frequencies. From the observed genotype frequencies, we calculate out the observed
allele frequencies here. And then from these observed allele
frequencies, we look at the expected, or predicted, Hardy-Weinberg
genotype frequencies. And these are down here. In this particular case, with the Navajo
alone, we see a pretty good fit between the observed genotype frequencies
and the predicted genotype frequencies. Now what happens when we sample across
two populations simultaneously. Well, if we sample from Navajo and
Aborigine together, we follow the same overall procedure. But in this case, now when we look at
the predicted genotype frequencies, they do not very well match
the observed genotype frequencies. And particularly we see this deficiency
of heterozygotes in the observed all through to the predicted. The 0.488 predicted number is much
greater than the observed, 2.246. I attributed this to the Wahlund effect. That is what happens when you have
populations that differ in allele frequencies even if each population
individually is a Hardy-Weinberg. If you put them together,
you see a deficit of heterozygotes. Now how is it that populations differ? Well, I like to look at this in two ways. One possible way is they may have
different allele and genotype frequencies. That is what we have been emphasizing so
far. We'll come back to that in just a moment. But first,
I wanted to entertain another possibility. There may be alleles at some genes
that are found in some populations but not found in other populations. You may have some alleles that are found,
for example, in just East Asians, but you will never see those particular
alleles at other populations. The genes will be there but
the particular alleles would not. This is especially likely under
two particular conditions. One is if it's a very recent new mutation
that arose in an East Asian population, for example, it hasn't spread to others. Alternatively, if the populations
are in complete isolation, then that difference can persist for
quite some time. So let's talk just briefly
about this latter group and then we'll come back to the former. Now differences can arise by mutation and
spread. So let's say in an ancestral population,
everybody was aa, bb. You can have over time, let's say for
example the population splits, so this is indicating a split
between the population. So in one population you're the one on the
right, you have a mutation from b to B. This B allele can spread, and
eventually everybody here may be aa, BB. In this other population, the one on the
lef,t you can have a mutation from a to A. The A allele can spread and
eventually this population can be AA, bb. So again, we have in this case
a split between populations, and we have differences that can then
arise and potentially spread. This is especially likely if
you have complete isolation. We'll come back to this section when
we talk about speciation later on. Now groups within species
are different yet they are related. That they may have some of these
unique alleles that are not found in other groups. But it's probably more likely that most
of them have very different genotype or allele frequencies instead. This shows approximate relationships
from one calculation of various human ethnic groups. So for example, Melanesian and Papuan
are more closely related to each other than either is two populations from
the Mediterranean or from Siberia, etc. Now how do we quantify these differences? Well the easiest thing to
quantify is if everybody in one population differs from everybody else
in another population at some allele. This is referred to as a fixed difference,
all right? So for example,
in Population 1 everybody's AA. Population 2, everybody's aa. So we're looking specifically
at the aging in this case. Everybody in one population differs
from everybody in the other population. We refer to this as a fixed difference. So you go back to the ancestor,
presumably they had the same alleles. But something arose, at least in one
population, and spread to make it so it was completely different from
the ancestor and from the others. Now, this does happen, but
it's not very common within a species. And it's generally not true among
modern human ethnic groups. Instead as I said, it's more common that you have frequency
differences of alleles and genotypes. For example A may have a frequency
of 0.7 in East Asians, but 0.5 in Indian populations. That's just as an example. Now, what we're trying to do here,
let me emphasize this, is we're measuring differences
between populations, not individuals. We cannot say just because somebody has A, oh therefore they are of Middle Eastern
descent or something like that. It's based on overall population. The relative abundance
of particular alleles differs in one population as a whole
relative to other populations as a whole. Well this poses a challenge. How do we quantify these slight
differences in frequency between populations? Well, the deviation from Hardy-Weinberg
that's associated with the Wahlund effect that I've already introduced, actually allows you to quantify allele
frequency differences between population. So, let's assume the two populations
are at Hardy-Weinberg, and that is an important assumption. We'll come back to that later. So, if you sample each population by
itself you'll see them at Hardy-Weinberg. So this would be similar to what
we saw with the Aborigines and the Navajo example I showed you earlier. But if you sample both together,
we see this deviation from Hardy-Weinberg. And again, as you saw,
that was the Wahlund effect. Now how big this deviation is from
Hardy-Weinberg when sampling these populations simultaneously, will quantify
the difference in allele frequencies. That if you're fairly close,
the allele frequencies must be similar. If you're very different, then you'll
see a very large Wahlund effect. So the measure that we'll
use is referred to as F ST. So it's a F with subscript ST. Now this measure ranges from 0 to 1. If you have 0, then there is absolutely
no frequency differences between the populations you're studying. If it's between 0 and 1, then the allele
frequencies differ somewhat, and if it's 1 you actually have
this fixed sequence difference. Such that for
example everyone in this population is AA, everybody in that population is aa. They don't actually all
have to be the same. Maybe all of these would be a1 a1,
or a1 a2, or a2 a2, and over here in this other population
they're all a3 a3 or a3 a4 or a4 a4. Basically it just means you have no
overlap in alleles between this population and that population. Now the measure is very simple. So F ST can be estimated as
the Hardy-Weinberg predicted 2pq. Basically what would happen if
you were at Hardy-Weinberg- % observed heterozygotes /
Hardy-Weinberg predicted 2pq. Essentially it's the predicted-
the observed / the predicted, which is fairly common. Let me show you an application of this,
and you'll see this is very straightforward. So let's say that, there's an example as
I mentioned to you of fixed difference. Population 1 everybody's AA. Population 2, everybody's aa. So here's the totals. Now let's imagine we're sampling these
two populations together, and we have to assume that we're sampling similar
numbers here to calculate F ST correctly. So here's our pooled population sample,
100, 0, 100. Well, if we calculate this out
the total genotype count is 200. When we look at the genotype frequencies
the observed would be 0.5, 0, and 0.5. All right, half the individuals we're sampling
from this pooled population are AA. Half of them are aa, none of them are Aa. Here are our allele frequencies,
0.5 and 0.5. All right, all straightforward so far. Our Hardy-Weinberg predicted
2pq should be 0.5. And what we see is this contrast
dramatically from our observed. So here's our Hardy-Weinberg predicted. Here's our observed. And we see a striking
contrast between these two. Now we apply that formula I just gave you. This is the Hardy-Weinberg predicted,
0.5,- the observed, 0, / 0.5, and this gives you an F ST of 1. As I mentioned, if you have an F ST of 1,
that indicates a fixed difference. Let's try one that's not quite so extreme. Here's a set of populations. Each population size here is 1,000. So we have our total
population size is 2,000. This population is at Hardy-Weinberg. This population is also at Hardy-Weinberg,
but they differ in allele frequencies. So, here's our pooled population,
I just summed these numbers together. 250 + 90 is 340. 250 + 490 is 740, etc. So again, what we do is we calculate
the totals, get the genotype frequencies, get the allele frequency. So, here's our total, 2,000. Here's our genotype frequencies, which is
each of those numbers divided by 2000. Here's our allele frequencies, actually
comes out very nicely to 0.6 and 0.4. So what is our Hardy-Weinburg
predicted 2pq? Well, it would be 2 times 0.6 time 0.4. So 0.6 time 0.4 is 0.24, so our predictive should be 0.48 if
my math in my head is correct. That is what we see. In contrast to the observed, it's 0.46, so
again we have a slight difference here. It's not a huge difference in this case,
but it is noticeable nonetheless. Well now we can calculate a much
smaller F ST than we did before. Here's our number,
here's our Hardy Weinberg predicted, 0.48- 0.46 which is the observed, / 0.48. Again, it's always the predicted minus
the observed over the predicted. And this case our F ST
measure comes out to 0.042. And again in this case we have small
differences in allele frequencies. In the previous example we had a very
large difference in allele frequencies, and you can see that F ST ranges
from 0 to 1, 0 being no difference, 1 being complete difference. Let me give you one to try. Here's a mixed data from
the Aborigines and Navajo. The numbers here aren't perfect because
the sample sizes weren't exactly right, but let's just pretend for
a moment that they are. Go ahead and calculate what you would
see as F ST in this example for Aborigine to Navajo. Well, I hope that wasn't too difficult. Let's go ahead and run through them. Again, it's just to
remind you what F ST is. F ST is the Hardy-Weinberg predicted- the
observed heterozygotes / the predicted. So let's put in the numbers. Here's our allele frequencies. Here's our expected, or
Hardy-Weinberg predicted. We do see a deviation in this case. There's our predicted is 0.488,
our observed is 0.246. So what should F ST be? F ST would be in this case 0.488- 0.246 / 0.488. Comes out not exactly but
approximately 0.5. So in this case we see
a fairly large F ST. And you'd expect this that there's been no
historical gene flow between Aborigine and Navajo. Now again to recap,
F ST is larger when you're comparing populations that are more
different in allele frequencies. So again the Aborigine and Navajo were
very different allele frequencies and that's why we saw fairly large F ST there,
0.5. If the frequencies were identical,
F ST would be 0. If they were fixed different,
F ST would be 1. Now let me give you a couple of values, so you get an idea of what we
actually see in human populations. Obviously Aborigine and
Navajo is an extreme example. Among human populations,
this is from a 2010 study. They used a little bit
over a million SNPs. If you look at African Americans relative
to Europeans, F ST was about 0.11, so that's noticeable, but not tremendous. African Americans to Chinese,
F ST was 0.15. Europeans to Chinese, F ST was about 0.11. And if you look among the European
populations, let's say for example, you compare the Spanish to the Italians
to the Germans, things like that. F ST's typically, not always, but
typically less than 0.01, very, very low as you look
at that sort of scale. Let me show you a big table. Here's a big table of F ST measures. I'm not going to walk
through all of these, but you can see that there are some
cases which are fairly high. Like over here we have a couple that
are over 0.2, like Papuan to Red Sea, etc. Several of these are high. Several of these are low. But you see this range of values. Now what is F ST in words? Well, we can define F ST as the percent
heterozygous of randomly chosen alleles within populations,
that's the observed aspect, relative to what would be expected
in the entire population, okay? It's the percent heterozygous of randomly
chosen alleles within populations, relative to what would be expected
if there was completely randomly interbreeding. And again, it's measuring this
difference in allele frequencies. So, why don't we see higher
F ST among human populations? We know there's a lot of non random
mating out there, why isn't it bigger? Well, there's a couple of reasons. First, some of the assumptions of F ST are
violated in humans, that this is supposed to be applied to genes experiencing
little or no natural selection. You'll recall I mentioned earlier that
F ST should be applied when each of the individual populations is
known to be at Hardy-Weinberg. Now some of the SNPs, for example, that were studied in that
previous example, may not be neutral. In fact, some of that variation may
be under some sort of selection. It's also susceptible to differences, and historic changes in
population size among groups. But probably the biggest reason
we don't see higher F ST values is because we actually do have
a fair amount of gene flow or closer to random mating among population. That'll be the subject for the next video. Thank you.