Hello. And welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. Now, in the past,
we've talked about Recombination. We've talked about,
the Process of Recombination. Primarily, in the Context of
Transmission Genetics and Genetic Mapping. Now, the question I
wanted to ask you today, is what are the Evolutionary Advantages
of Sex and Recombination? Those two things
are intrinsically tied together. Basically, why do we see so
much Recombination within a species? Well, I have a cute subtitle for
today's lecture. That is,still more reasons
that Recombination rocks! Now, Sex and Recombination
are intrinsically tied together. So let's first explore, Sexual
Reproduction versus Asexual Reproduction. Now, there are several Forms
of Asexual Reproduction, some of which you may have heard of. Asexual Reproduction can
be through Binary Fission. Where you have basically,
a single cell that splits into two cells, that are essentially complete
organisms in and of themselves. You can have budding as depicted
here on this slide with the hydra. You can see the little baby
hydras coming off the mom hydra. We obviously, don't do that. My arm can't grow off
into a kid who grows up. You can have Parthenogenesis, which is offspring that come
out from unfertilized eggs. That's actually observed
in various insect species. All of these processes produce exact
genetic replicas of the parents. Basically, they produce clone. Sexual Reproduction, in contrast, involves the union of genetic material
from a mom and a dad, or two parents. It doesn't have to be a mom and a dad. And they're put together. And then ultimately, before that new
organism passes on its offspring, its genetic material can
be shuffled in its gamete. Now, what process shuffles this
genetic material in the gametes? It's our favorite process, Recombination. You may not know this, but there are
several benefits to asexual reproduction. First, with asexual reproduction,
every individual can make babies directly. In contrast with sexual reproduction as
we humans do, you actually need to find, if you are a male, you need to find
a female in order to produce offspring. With asexual reproduction,
anybody can just bud off a baby. [LAUGH] So
this is potentially a good thing. Similarly, with asexual reproduction,
you don't need to go out and find mates. So this is something that sometimes
involves a lot of energy. You have to sometimes have these
characteristics that may actually be maladaptive, in general, but
are good for attracting mates. So this is actually a big
advantage to asexual reproduction. In contrast, sexual reproduction requires, that you actually go and
woo your potential mate. The problem with asexual reproduction,
offspring get all your genes. In contrast with sexual reproduction,
offspring get half your genes. So, it seems like overall, there is a lot
of benefits to asexual reproduction. You can pass on more of your genes. You don't need the intermediary. You don't need to go hunting and
wooing mates. Nonetheless, we find that sexual
reproduction is very, very common. It is particularly true in the animal,
plant, and fungal kingdoms. We tend to see for many of the species,
they only have sexual reproduction. And those few that do have asexual
reproduction, it's often not complete. That basically, they'll go through a few
generations of asexual reproduction. And then, they'll have a sexual phase. So we see all these benefits of
asexuality, on the one hand. But on the other hand,
sexual reproduction is very, very common. Why is this? Well, the benefits come from
our friend recombination. So, I'm going to give you
two major reasons but there's actually a slew of reasons that
contribute to why sexual reproduction and recombination are beneficial. The first one we'll talk about is,
that recombination makes combinations of alleles across two or
more loci that may be advantageous. So imagine that, for example,
to have maximal fitness, you need to be, you need to have
the big A allele at one of your loci. And you'd have a big B
allele at another loci. How do you put these things together? Recombination facilitates that and
I'll show you that in just a second. But this is especially important
when you have epistasis or interactions between loci that
favor particular combinations. So let's use an example,
let's imagine just as I was saying before, that you have a starting population
where everybody is aabbb. Your optimal genotype has a A & B, but
mutations from a to A are very rare. And mutations from b to B are very rare. So you have this population, are mostly
little a, little a, little b, little b. And every now and
then a mutation crops up. Well there's a big A, well that's good,
but it's still not the optimal. Well there's a big B, that's good,
but it's still not the optimal. There's a big B.
There's a big A. If you only have asexual reproduction,
this big A and this big B will never come together. Even if they have kids together, well obviously, they're not having kids
together, if it's asexual reproduction. But if in some way, they interacted, you would not put this
big A with this big B into one individual. So the question is, how could you put
this genotype, big A, little a, big B, little b together? If you have the only asexual reproduction. You basically have to wait for
that mutation to arise. So here this individual has a big A,
you have to wait for a big B mutation to come up in either this individual or
one of it's offspring in the future. And this individual here,
you'd have to wait for a big A to rise either in this
individual or in one of it's offspring. You'd have to wait for mutations. With outright combination, you need to wait a very long time
to get the optimal genotype. In contrast, if you have recombination,
you can accelerate adaptation. That basically,
this individual could have a baby. This individual and some of the offspring
would have that optimal genotype. Recombination can make advantageous
mutations, get together much more rapidly. This allows for more efficient adaptation,
second reason is related. Recombination basically helps
you get rid of bad mutations. And in this regard,
it helps you create or restore. And you'll see what I mean in just
a second, mutation-free offspring. So let me illustrate this. Let's imagine a case of several
independent lineages that are asexual. So here are your four lineages here. The first individual,
second, third, and fourth. This right here on the far right,
is depicting the number of detrimental mutations that we have
per individual in that generation. In this case,
nobody has any bad mutations. Everybody's got a 0, and
the range that we see here is a 0. So, let's wait 10 generations. Oop!
Another mutation arrives here. This individual is a little less
fit than the rest of these. Well, guess what? Every offspring that comes from this
individual is gonna have that same bad mutation. There's no way to get rid of it. There's no way for
him to eliminate that, so all his offspring are doomed
to carry this bad mutation. These ones are still all okay. But what's gonna happen after more time? Well, we'll have more mutations
arising here, here, here, here. Eventually as you see,
there's a range of 0-1 bad mutations, 0-1, a couple more have 1,
a couple more have 1. Down here, the range is one to two. We actually have no individuals left in
the population after a very long period of time, that are lacking bad mutations. Everybody has bad mutations. So in this regard, the population,
as a whole, is getting more sickly. And in fact, the population gets worse,
or sicker, and worse every single generations. A few generations later,
you might see this distribution of number of bad mutations, again,
nobody has zero bad mutations. The previous example you saw, it was
just one to two but maybe after a while, it's a hump around three. Very few individuals have one, more have
three, more than four bad mutations. You wait a little bit longer,
you lose the zero and one. And now, everybody has two or
more bad mutations. Essentially, again,
the population gets worse and worse because individuals tend
to accumulate these mutations. And they have no way to shed them. Right, there's no way to get this
good version of this gene and this good version of that gene. And put them together. This process is called Muller's ratchet. If any of you are familiar with a ratchet, it's something that actually will
only turn things in one direction. In this case, the analogy here,
is that the population is getting worse. You turn it one direction. There's no way to move the,
let me move the socket the other way. Now, if you had a recombination. You actually can get some offspring
that don't have bad mutations. So here are two individuals that
are both curing two bad mutations. This one has, in this case, the red is indicated a bad
mutation rather than a good one. So this one has bad allele at A,
bad allele at B. This one has bad allele at C,
a bad allele at D. Well, we cross them together. Some individuals, some of the off spring
from this will actually, will be worse. They'll have four bad mutations. Those will be very bad. Some will be comparable. This one has two bad mutations, but it has a different combination of bad
mutations than either of the parents. But some will be better. This is the critical element. You can actually recreate
the zero-mutation class. You can recreate some individuals
that have no bad mutations. This one will reproduce more,
this will reproduce some and this will probably be
the most poor reproduction. So eventually, this is the type that
will spread within the population. So overall, I'd have to say that recombination is
good despite the many costs of sex. Because recombination can produce these
advantageous combinations of alleles as I showed you. And in that regard,
it can accelerate adaptation. Recombination also allows
the population to get rid off, or unload itself, from these bad mutations. Essentially, it stops the ratchet. Now this will especially be true, if
you're living in a variable environment. If you're in a very constant environment, then maybe not having
a recombination isn't so bad. But if you're in a variable environment, you're essentially hedging your bets
by producing more buried offspring. So this is one of the many ways that
recombination is really good for our species. And this is why, we tend to think
that recombination is very, very common when we work across species,
particularly animals, plants, and fungi. And now, what does recombination do,
in terms of, molecular evolution? Now, we've shown that it
can combine good mutations. We've shown that it can
get rid of bad mutations. But how does it affect neutral sequence. Sequences that really don't matter. How much does it affect? How much variation there is
present in nucleotide sequence? This variation that has no
particular effect out of it. But we'll come back to that,
the next set of videos. Thank you.