Hello, and welcome back to introduction
to genetics and evolution. We've been talking so
far about mapping complex traits. We first talked about some of the
principles associated with such mapping of complex traits. And we've also talked about how
you do it using a cross, and we used this trajectory
of associations string. Now lets look at an alternative approach. You know with simple genetic
traits we've talked about mapping using data from overall populations. Well we can do the same thing here,
in the case of complex traits. Now you may be thinking first,
why would we wanna do this? Well, when your QTL
mapping across a pedigree, what happens is you're localizing
the genes affecting this difference between the original strains or people. So let's say you're using a pedigree,
you're looking at where are the genes contributing to breast cancer
predisposition in this particular family. So let's say you're mapping a gene and let's say in this case it's diabetes
rather than breast cancer in one family. And you map it to chromosome
18 arm p location 22. Let's say there's a very strong
effect next to a marker. Then you look at another
family that has diabetes and you see absolutely no
affect to this region. Even though they have
a lot of diabetes and even though it is clearly running in
the family, so it has a genetic component. Why would you see this dichotomy? Why would it have a strong effect in this
family and no effect in this family? Well the answer is, again, there are many different genes that can
contribute to disease predispositions. And you may see in one family there's
a particular mutation that's contributing to diabetes predisposition, and there's a completely
different one in another family. So when you study a trait
in one single family, you're only identifying what's causing
that variation within that family. It's important, now,
to look at the broader population, if you want to understand what
causes diabetes more broadly. So the other approach that
people use is this mapping in populations by association study. And a common variant of this is referred
to as the genome wide association study. This has become extremely
popular lately with the ability to examine markers across
the whole genome simultaneously. And of course with having
a human genome sequence. We discussed this in general in
the context of simple traits. And the same principle applies as before. If a marker is close to
the disease causing gene, then individuals having one allele will
be more likely to have the disease than individuals having the other allele. So there is an association between
genotype at the markers, and likelihood of disease, or
whatever the phenotype is. The same principle is true not only
in simple genes and things, but also in multiple gene traits,
such as disease. So what people do, especially with this
genome-wide association study aspect is they test many, many, many markers, right? Not just three, five, ten, 100, or
even 1,000, but many, many markers. Well you'll find is that some will have
an allele associated with the disease. Now they're not gonna have huge
associations kind of like some of the things we talked about before. You may see something like this. This would be a very large
association in this case. That big A big A individuals have a
probability of getting the disease of 10%. Little a little a individuals have a
probability of getting the disease of 1%. That actually is a very large effect
relative to most of these sorts of things. Now what happens is you do some sort
of statistical test such as maybe a chi square. And this will say that this difference
is unlikely to have happened by chance given that you've sampled hundreds or
thousands of individuals and you see this big of an association. In contrast, many other markers
will have no association. So, this b marker, for example, may have
probability of gaining disease of 1.5%. Little b,
little b has a probability of 1.6%. So, the difference between big B,
big B and little b, little b is pretty trivial in terms
of likelihood of getting the disease. Now, we discussed LOD plots when we
were talking about genetic crosses, same thing would apply with pedigrees. We use something very similar
with association studies. We have these sorts of plots,
excuse me, of association. But just like with simple traits, you can actually be much more
fine scale because you're looking at the scale of the distance between these
recombination hot spots, just as before. So, this is an example. This is a mapping study
from February 2012 and published in Nature Genetics
of Azospermia in Chinese men. So, these are people who
are having sperm difficulties. And you see here this LOD
score on the y axis and position of the chromosome on the x axis. And we see here there's a bunch of
markers that have a strong association with this trait. Whereas out here, there are markers
that don't have any associations. So if we're going to do something
along the lines of this A and B, this might be the big A,
big A individuals, right, versus little A, little A where's there's
a strong association. This might be where B is where's
basically no association of the trait. Okay. Now what often happens, you find, since this is a complex trait,
not one but many possible factors. So this is from that same
issue of nature genetics. This is just a title of paper, a genome
wide association study in Han Chinese identifies multiple susceptibility
loci for IgA nephropathy. And you see there's one on chromosome 8,
one on chromosome 17, one on chromosome 22. Again we're looking at the case of complex
traits, where there are many, many genes that have allelic variation, or genotypes
that are associated with the phenotype. Now there's a problem that comes out
with genome-wide association studies. This problem is the issue
of multiple comparisons. Now those of you who are at Duke,
have seen this in lab, but let me tell you more generally. The chi square test will give
you a probability of getting an association by chance. I just mentioned that in
a previous slide as well. Now, if you roll two dice, imagine you have something that's
just standard six sided dice. You roll them and
you get snake-eyes twice in a row. Are they loaded? Well you may think
the answer is yes because, the probability of getting snake-eyes
twice in a row is very low. In fact it's about 0.1% chance that
you'd get snake-eyes twice in a row. It's not zero, but
it's very, very unlikely. So let's think of this in
the context of looking at markers across the whole genome. How likely is it that you get
something very improbable? Well, if you rolled the dice a million
times, what is the chance you get snake eyes twice in a row sometime
over the course of that million? Well the answer is it's about 99.99%
chance that you should get that somewhere in there. This is a problem associated with
genome wide association studies. That if you're testing a million SNPs, a million of these markers, for an
association with the disease of interest you're very likely to get an association
that looks strong by chance, when you do the statistical test, but
there's no biological basis to it. That, in fact,
this region has no effect, whatsoever. There's no key TL there that's
contributing to the trait of interest. But since you're testing so many times,
the odds of you getting something that seems unlikely enough to be
suggestive of a real effect is very high. So as a result instead of using the
standard five percent probability cutoff that people often use in statistics, people often use things like
a .00001% probability as a cut off. This is a way to work around this problem. So again at that point if you
see an association you have very high confidence that there's
probably some sort of gene near there. The downside to this is that it
requires a very strong association. Probably, and this probably happens a lot
in genome-wide association studies, you actually see some associations,
but you throw them out because you say not strong enough to be
statistically convincing. So we end up losing a lot of good
associations because we can't distinguish the good ones from the bad
ones except in these very strong cases. So let's contrast these two types of
studies, Pedigree cross versus Population. Again with a Pedigree across you
are finding genetic factors that cause differences in that family. So you have high power for a small
number of genes because probably within a particular family there is not tons of
genes with allude variation contributing to diabetes, breast cancer,
and nephropathy, whatever. In contrast, a population
association study is trying to find genetic factors causing variation
across the whole population. Now typically here, you have much lower power because you're
looking at different causes throughout. But you can find
potentially more genes and, if you do find them, you can localize them
much more precisely as I mentioned before. You may be wondering why is it
that you have so much lower power? Aside from the statistical aspect,
why do you have lower power? Well, there's another facet in here. In crosses and pedigrees, you're limited to mapping the genes
with effects in that crosses. You're limited to mapping genes
with effects in that cross. But, the alleles you're mapping
are initially abundant, right? That if you're crossing,
say, an individual big Z, little z, cross the little z,
little z, and let's say this is the one that
actually causes the mutation. In that initial cross, the fraction
of individuals that have it is 25, or the fraction of chromosomes, excuse me,
that have the mutation is 25%. So your ability to detect it is very high. Let's say in a population though you
can theoretically map alleles at any gene causing this effect. And there's probably
a lot of them doing it. But you may have many different very rare variants causing
the same effect or disease. So in this case, let's say for
example this capital A and this capital Z both cause the disease. They're each initially very rare, so
it's very hard to see their effects. It's because of this rarity. Now genome-wide association
studies work well when you're mapping
common disease variants. But an open question is are most
disease variants common? In fact,
several people have argued that in fact most disease causing
variants are quite rare. Those often different rare mutations
that cause the same disease. I refer you in this context to
an interview that I have online with Professor David Goldstein from
Duke University about this idea, about rare variants causing disease. There's another confounding factor
that comes along with both of these kinds of studies. That is you can see differences among
ethnic groups for associations. Sometimes a marker allele's associated
with a disease in one ethnic group, but it's not associated when look
at another ethnic group. That if you map something
with the Hahn Chinese, you may see an effect associated
with this particular region. In contrast when you look at say,
a Latin American population, you may not see that association. Let me give you a real example of this. This is from Type II Diabetes. In this case, the initial study that was
done, was done using East Asian subjects. What they found is that there were
four SNPs that were identified, that have a pretty strong
association with this diabetes, in this set of East Asian subjects. In contrast when they looked in European
populations there was one particular SNP. One on chromosome 11 that had no
detectable effect in Europeans. So clearly there was some sort of
difference between these two groups. There are many possible explanations for
this. One of them is we
mentioned before epistasis. There's interactions between genes that,
for example, another variant may be very common
in Europeans that makes it so this particular gene variant that's
near this SNP that's causing diabetes in East Asians,
doesn't have that effect in Europeans. That's one possibility. Another possibility is the allele at
that gene which is causing diabetes in East Asians just isn't found in
Europeans populations, or is very rare. There's a lot of possible
explanations out there. But importantly, we can't immediately
extrapolate and say oh, there's the gene that's causing this disease, and
just assume that that's causing it across different families, across different
ethnic groups, across different economies. So, mapping is often a very complex task,
but it's obviously very worthwhile,
because we have made in roads in identifying many genes that
are associated with disease. Some of them with fairly large effects, though many with much
more moderate effects. These are the genes that are actually
used in those studies that you get from companies like 23 and Me,
that takes examples, or takes samples of your saliva, and
tell you your disease predisposition. They're using this sort of data
to tell you what your likelihood is of getting the. Thank you very much. I hope you enjoyed this video.