Hello, and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In this video,
we'll be talking about a new process. We'll be looking at sexual selection. We've talked extensively before
about natural selection. Now, we wanna focus on that
facet of natural selection devoted to how individuals attract mates. Now we talked briefly before about
the advantages of sexual reproduction. But we didn't do is we didn't address some
of the striking outcomes in terms of both behavior and appearance. So let's dive right in. First, what is sexual selection? Well again natural selection and sexual
selection are intrinsically related. Natural selection again is when you have
heritable traits that aid the survival or reproduction, and those traits then
spread in natural populations, okay? Now with sexual selection, we're gonna be looking at just
a subset of those features. We're gonna be looking at those
related to the ability to secure and reproduce with mates. Now obviously you need to reproduce
to pass on your genes, and doing so
better passes on more of your genes. So there's more copies
of it in the population. So, if you can have traits that make
you mate more, that's probably good. So if you have a trait that attractive,
that's good right? Well, some traits that seem to
be tied to one sex appear to be maladapted to survival. They appear to be bad for survival. So this creates a bit of a conundrum. How do these maladaptive traits spread? And why do you intend to see these,
it's not always, but we tend to see these
exaggerated traits in males. Let's look at a few examples here. So we have over here in the left,
top block the extinct Irish Elk. This had huge antlers. And they're estimated maybe to
weigh on the order of 80 pounds or perhaps 35 kilograms. That's huge. Why on Earth was it good to carry
this heavy thing on your head? Well we have a couple of other things
that are probably familiar to you like the peacock with its elaborate tail. In this case, it has it down. Here's a rhinoceros beetle,
look at that big horn that it has there. And, we have here the red-collared
widow bird that has this very long extended tail. Well, Darwin saw all these things,
and he figured something must be up. So, what he suggested and
has since been confirmed many, many times, is that these traits
are exaggerated through sexual selection. So here's a direct quote from Darwin. The habitual or even occasional
preference by the female of the more attractive males would almost
certainly lead to their modification. That because these are attractive, they are enhancing fitness overall and
they are spreading. Now, what Coyne actually clarifies this
in his book associated with his class, sexually selected traits will
evolve if they more than offset the male's diminished survival with
an increase in his reproduction. So yes, although maybe he's more
likely to be caught by a predator. Since he mates so much more, it more
than offsets that survival disadvantage. Well, there's a key for this to work. The key is you have to
have a lot of mates, okay? So how many mates do most organisms have? Well, when you look across the animal
kingdom, multiple mates for males or females are quiet common. Then you're maybe familiar with
this idea of social monogamy. That's when you have the social bond
of one male and one female at a time. People tend to think of ducks, so
this is actually a poor example. People tend to think of ducks
because they see the male duck and the female ducks swimming around together. Now, separate from social monogamy,
there's also sexual monogamy. That's when partners are sexually
exclusive with each other. Now with the growth of DNA
based assays for paternity. What people have found is a lot of
these species that appear to be socially monogamous,
are actually not sexually monogamous. In fact,
extra-pair copulations are quite common. Now the extra-pair copulations are when
you're essentially breeding with somebody outside of your social pair. This is quite common across
much of the animal kingdom. And again with more genetic
data we see this much better. Now if we assume there are multiple mates,
then the increase in number of matings, or increased number of partners, will often
increase your potential reproduction. Again, this assumes non-monogamy, right. So this is an important facet, to this. We are assuming non-sexual monogamy. Now what's interesting is
the difference between sexes in potential reproductive rate,
is very important. Like basically,
how many offspring could you have? Well, let's look at the world records for
humans, though I don't usually like using
humans for these sorts of examples. The world record that's know for
a human female is about 69 children. That is obviously huge. Now, what would you think the world
record for a human male would be? Now, potentially you can think, well,
how many kids could a male sire over the course of a year versus a female
sire over the course of a year? The female, you're looking at one to two, maybe a little bit more if they
have multiple kids at a time. But with males, the potential
reproductive rate is much higher. And, in fact, the world record for
a human male is somewhere between 867 and 1,000 [LAUGH] over their lifetime. Again, the potential reproductive rate for males is much higher than the potential
reproductive rate for females. Now why this difference? Well, part of the reason is probably that
females often invest more in resources and in care, and that limits their
reproductive opportunities. All right, so for example,
the human female. If they're gonna give birth to a child,
they have this long period of labor through which they cannot
be reproducing anymore. They are stuck with that period. And then even after that, there is this care post-reproduction
that also slows them down. Now, an estimate from one study
suggested that, on average, females devote 100 to 1000 times
more resources to egg production than males devote to ejaculate production. That's a pretty big difference. Just as one extreme example many
of you are probably familiar with the bird, the kiwi. Well it's egg is 15%
of its overall weight. So just that physical investment in
creating this one offspring is huge. Now a lot of these ideas fall
from an interesting principle. This is referred to as
Bateman's principle. So let's look at this first
in terms of the females, and then in terms of the males. With the females there is typically low
variation in female mating success. And, by that, I mean that most
females will tend to mate, and they will tend to produce offspring, okay? Now, interestingly, more matings
by female does not necessarily lead to more offspring, because again,
they're sort of capped, that they can copulate multiple times,
but that's not going to increase the number of times they actually
produce offspring, for most animals. And they are limited by resources then,
again there's a high investment for producing these offspring. With males a lot of that isn't true, now there is typically very high
variation in male mating success. There's some males who will produce many,
many, many offspring with
many different females. And there are a lot of males who
will just produce no offspring. So there's quite a bit of this
variation in male mating success. I'll show you an example of this
in just a couple of minutes. Typically with males more matings,
in this case meaning more matings with different females,
will typically lead to far more offspring. And finally they are limited
by access to females. So there's a lot of this competition for
access to females. Now, what is the relationship between
mate number and offspring number. Let me show you one example. Here's a difference of outcome
from having more mates. These are from studies
of the Rough-skinned newt as you can see over here. Now I'd like you to look at how the x axis
here we have different numbers of mates. And the y axis here numbers of offspring. The orange dots are for
females the blue dots are for males. Now you look there at the correlation for
males, as you have more mates, you typically have a lot more offspring. With females, interestingly,
as you have more mates, you don't typically have
a lot more offspring. So how does that work? One question people always ask
is how is this possible since everybody has a mother and a father? How can you get this difference? Well, let me give you some made-up, but
representative, data to illustrate. And I'll show you some real
data in a couple of slides. Here's a likely scenario,
what you might see within a species, when you look at variation in mating
success within a mating season. With females,
the vast majority will mate once. Some may mate zero, some may mate
a little bit more, but on average, they're just getting mated and that's it. Mostly the reason for this is a lot of
females, actually once they have mated in different species will not mate
again with another male for awhile. Okay?
Now what you'll see here for males, you see this much bigger spread
that a lot of males have no mates. Some have one, some have two,
some have three, but you have a couple of the super
males who have many many offspring. If you look at these two things, they have
the same average number of mating for males and females because, again, every
copulation has to involve one of each. But with females,
most of them succeed once. With males, many, many fail, and
they're very, and the subset are very, very successful. Now this spread here, leads to very
intense competition among males. All the males wanna be here
to the right end of it. They don't want to be at
the far left end of this. Let me show you some real data
with elephant seals to illustrate. With elephant seals, and this has been studied quite extensively
as one of the extremes examples, you have this super variance
in male mating success. So in one study they showed that 28%
of males were observed mating at least once in a two year breeding season. So what does that mean? Is that probably about 72%
were never observed to mate. So a large number of males
were never successful. Among those that did mate, the average
number of mates was quite high. They actually mated about
20 different times. Now the distribution is highly correlated
with the distribution of paternities. So those that did mate a lot
did sire a lot of offspring. So this big spread for males. Here's an example from
one group with 14 males. The 11 bulls sired no pups. Two bulls sired one pup each and
one bull sired 24 pups. So again,
there's this intense competition. There's a couple of big winners, and
there's a lot of loser with males. All right. So again, this is very,
very strong sexual selection. You don't tend to see this
sort of spread with females. Because again the potential
reproductive rate is much lower. Now what is the outcome of this? Well one outcome which is
quite interesting is that we tend to see male-female dimorphism
correlating with sexual selection. What do I mean by dimorphism? By dimorphism I mean,
some difference between males and females. Often in physical size or weight that you know if you are,
in this case on the right, we have a dimorphic couple where
the male's huge and the female's little. This case here we have a mono morphic
couple where they're about the same size. Typically speaking, when you have few males monopolizing
most of the females, and then you tend to see this big difference
in size between the males and the females. So in the case of the Southern elephant
seals I showed you earlier, the males can be as large as 8,000 pounds, whereas
the females maybe about 2,000 pounds. So big, big difference in size. Now with humans you can see that yes,
there's an average difference, but we're a lot closer. There's probably not quite
the same extreme variance in humans as you see in elephant seals. Now, when you have less variation in
male-mating success, the females and males tend to be more similar in size. So this is a decent indicator. In this pattern, you can't even see it
when you look across primate species, so even including Chimps, gorillas, etc. Now it's not perfect, but
at least gives you some idea. So how might we leverage this? How might we leverage association? Well, here's a couple of choices for you. This is a question for you to answer. Could we use this to assess sexual
selection in extinct species? Could we use this to assess sexual
selection in newly discovered species? Or could we use it to study which
characters are influenced by sexual selection? Or maybe all of the above? Think about that. Well I hope that wasn't too difficult. The answer was indeed, all of the above. We can use this to assess sexual selection
in extinct species using fossils, because if we see this extreme dimorphism,
and that tends to be associated with extreme variance in mating success,
so strong sexual selection going on. So that's pretty cool. We can do the same thing with a newly
discovered species which we haven't had a chance to do extensive tests on. And we can look at the specific characters
that are likely to be influenced by sexual selection, because those are the ones that are likely
to show the greatest dimorphism. Okay? So, how is this competition occur? I've just been describing in a context
of competing for access to mates, but I haven't really gone into
it any more than that. Well, there's one sex, typically the males, that is subject
to the strong sexual selection. In this case, there should be competition, there should be competition
among the males for the females. So it's competitive,
there might be fighting, there might be something to keep
other males away from the females. Now, the other sex, typically the females,
is subject to much weaker sexual selection because they all tend
to get mated to and produce offspring. That sex, the one which is under weaker sexual
selection, should tend to be choosy. They can be very picky. They can afford to be picky because
they know they're going to mate. I'm anthropomorphizing, they don't
actually think this, but there's a high probability that they will mate, so
they can afford to be quite picky. Now Darwin recognized these two types of
sexual selection that broadly referred to as male competition and female choice. And that will be the subject
of our next video. Thank you, I hope you enjoyed this.