We're here today with Professor Jerry
Coyne from the University of Chicago, author of the best-selling
book Why Evolution is True. And we have some questions for him. Thank you for joining us Jerry. >> My pleasure. Hey out there. >> [LAUGH] So what first prompted
you to study evolutionary biology? Well, it was, as often the case,
a charismatic professor. In fact, probably one that you knew too. Actually it's a combination of them. My intro bio came sure my
very first day of class. 8 o'clock on Monday my first day of
college was a guy named Jack Brooks at William and Mary and he was a
herpetologist with evolutionary interests. And he was such an inspiring lecturer
that he got me all juiced up about studying evolution. To the extent that I wanted
to take genetics and evolution my second year
instead of my third year. Which was normal. So he let me do that and I fell into the spell of another
charismatic professor one you know of. Bruce Grant who was also very inspiring. Bruce studied the evolution. In the fruit flies, in particular,
just in speciation. And that was it for me. I was hooked on studying flies because
they could do experiments on them and they have a short life cycle. And the excitement that taught
evolution was conveyed to me. That shows, for one thing,
the importance of teachers, and- >> Absolutely. >> On people's lives. So many people have chosen their careers, including me,
because of charismatic teachers. >> Absolutely. So why did you decide to write the book,
Why Evolution is True. >> Well the book actually
grew out of my lectures. When I first started lecturing, God it was
almost thirty years ago at the University of Maryland, I was assigned to do
the Introductory of Evolution course. And so when I went back to look
at the textbooks on evolution, I had to teach it in the past. I found there's a real difference
between the textbooks that were used. Say in the 1920s and 30s when
evolution wasn't so widely accepted. Especially natural selection. And the textbooks that are used
now in particular the earlier textbooks have long,
long sections on why evolution is true. Or why we accept evolution. The fossil record. Embryology by the vestigial organs
the modern textbooks just assumed that you already knew that evidence and
that we you know once you already knew it. Just like when you take chemistry they
already assume you know that atoms exist. >> Yes. >> And then it just went on from there, you start with population genetics
Now the history of life etc. But the fact is that most kids
coming into Introductory Biology or Molecular Evolution don't know
the evidence of evolution. They don't know how strong it is. They don't know the areas for just arrived
and how they all draw together and how diverse those areas are arranging from
natural history to molecular biology. And I wanted the students to know that. And one of the main reasons I want them
to know that is because there's such an anti-evolution
sentiment in this country. 40% of Americans don't accept evolution
and if you count those that don't accept the scientific view of evolution,
it goes up to about 70%. >> Wow. >> There's about 30% think that
evolution is driven by spiritual or supernatural forces. So there's this huge opposition
to evolution in this country and I thought well. Maybe that opposition rests
at least partly on ignorance. That people just don't know that
there is so much evidence for it, and if I was to put it down in a simple, easy
to digest form for the general public, that maybe this opposition would go away. I think that was probably now, if I am
not mistaken idea but that was my idea. And I also wanted to put it down because
I have been teaching all of this stuff to the kids. I decided I was going to
start my evolution class with two to three hours of
the evidence for evolution. For several reasons. First of all they need to know it. If they need to know anything about
evolution going out into the world. They have to remember
what the evidence says. Second of all, because of this
pervasive anti-evolution sentiment, which is basically anti-science,
in America. And third of all, presenting
evolution against the alternative, which happens to be creationism. In this country, it is a way of
teaching how science is done, and having way different interpretations
of the same observations. It's a perfect lesson in how to learn
science, so for those reasons I thought I would not only teach the students in
my introductory course the stuff first. But also write a popular book about it. I'm not sure how much influence
that accounted changing people's minds about evolution. There's a lot of resistance turns
out to be based not on ignorance but on simple most genesis
based on the fact that it seems to contravene
people's religious beliefs. >> So what do you find,
this is a two part question. What do you find to be the most
interesting observation supporting the truth of evolution? And the most exciting subdiscipline or area of research within
evolutionary biology? And why on both? >> You know, and they said there was a lot of different
areas that come to bear on evolution. >> Absolutely. >> A fossil record is
the most obvious one, but there's also, as my book describes,
embryology, the way the organisms develop. The existence of non-functional
vestigial organs. Molecular biology, the hierarchical arrangement of species
in the tree of life and biogeography. And of those I guess when I was writing
the book, the one I found most interesting because I didn't know so
much about it was biogeography. That the distribution of plants and
animals on this planet can be explained only under Darwin's theory of evolution,
dispersal and subsequent evolution. And it was so important to Darwin that he
devoted two chapters of his book to it and ever since then, more and
more evidence has been accumulating. Like we found fossil marsupials on
Australia, which supports the notion that they move to Australia from
South America and Antarctica. Sorry, we found the fossils in
Antarctica and then Australia. They used to be connected together. They evolved in South America and now
we find marsupials mostly in Australia. Well if that happened they would
have had to get to Australia and to do that they would have
had to go through Antarctica. Well just in the last ten years they
finally found fossils of marsupials in Australia. So all of this evidence from geography
comes together to support evolution and it's very powerful and
pretty convincing and to me I was largely ignorant about
it I found it very interesting. It's also one of the ones that I'm
interested in is almost impossible to refute under any ulterior
theory especially creationists. In terms of what I find personally most
interesting when I research on it is of course what I work on and what you work on which is speciation
the origin of human species. I guess the reason I like it,
well first of all, Bruce Grant,
my undergraduate mentor and yours. He was interested in that, but I also became convinced that was
one of the last great outstanding questions in evolutionary biology
because Darwin didn't get it right. In the origin he got a lot right but he
didn't understand really how we have these distinct entities called species and
actually there's no inherent reason why nature should come to use in
these discrete packages called species. Why we wouldn't have a continuum of
words instead of species like robins and starlings and pigeons. Understanding why that's so, and
how those discrete groups come into being, was a question that,
Darwin didn't answer it. It started being proposed
again in the 30s and 40s. And the genetic basis for the formation
of these species really did not come to the fore until about the time I got
interested in it in the 80s or so. And it's because it's
an important question. I mean, one of the most important
questions in biology is why does nature come in these discrete
packages we call species? And I just wanted to be able to
make the contribution to that. >> That's great. So how do you think life first began? And have there been any good
studies explaining this or at least putting forth
compelling hypothesis? >> Well, there's compelling hypothesis. I mean, if you wanna read,
there's a lot of compelling hypothesis [LAUGH]
>> [LAUGH] >> There's just one question that we don't understand,
that doesn't mean that, I mean there's a lot of science
questions that we don't understand. Like how,
is there more than one universe and stuff. It doesn't mean the explanation And
something supernatural. It just means that we- it's very hard
to study the origin of life because we weren't there when it happened. Plus the original creatures that
evolved were probably proto-molecules, like amino acids or nucleotides,
which we now think. And they didn't fossilize. So we weren't there to see it, and
we don't have any fossil traces. So, how do we figure out how it started? That is hard.
There is a book called Genesis, which is just the word Genesis with
an asterisk in between each letter, which lays out all the various
hypotheses of how life began, started as depositions of
organic matter on clay, through crystallization,
their most prominent going hypothesis now is that life
started as sort of an RNA-like molecule. And the reason we think that is
because RNA is both something that can replicate but something that
can also have enzymatic activity. And the whole problem of the origin
of life is, how do we get DNA or nucleotides thing, that is both self
replicating and can produce proteins? When, to replicate you have to have
the proteins in the first place, and in order to get the proteins,
you have to have the nucleotide sequences. So you have this chicken and
egg problem, and that is partially answered by
the fact that RNA, unlike DNA, can both replicate itself and
has its own enzymatic properties. Now we don't know if that's right or not. And I don't know if we'll ever
really know how life began. We know it only began once. Because of certain fundamental
similarities of organisms. But, I think that in the next 50
years we'll be able to replicate the origin of life. Or, not replicate it, but
get the origin of life in the laboratory, under proto-life conditions. Those that are obtained at the beginning
of life about 3.5 billion years ago. And that will answer the question that
it couldn't have occurred naturally. That doesn't tell us how
it did occur naturally. >> Yeah.
>> And that question may forever elude us. But it will at least eliminate
the counter objection, because life couldn't have
originated naturally, it must have been done by God or
some other supernatural agent. But, you know, I mean, this is early days. This is a hard question. It's only one that's been properly
investigated in the last 20 or 30 years. It's gonna take a while. To get sort of forever, so. >> Yeah, it makes sense. So the classic example of an observation
that's said to refute, or that's said that could refute evolution is, quote,
fossil rabbits in the Precambrian. Barring that extreme example,
what else do you think could provide evidence against evolution
and the common ancestry of species? Well there's a lot of them. The one you said is the most common. Fossils in the wrong place. If we found a human fossil
400 million years ago, well, I mean that would cast severe doubt on it. You'd have to find more than one. Cuz you could say, well,
it was some kind of bizarre artifact. Some human fell down in through the sediments
>> [LAUGH] >> Through a crack in the Earth. I have a whole list of them. Adaptations in one species, for
example, that are good only for members of another species. Darwinism says, you cannot evolve
something in a species if it is not useful for the individuals for that species. So if you find something,
like, for example, nipples [LAUGH] on some mammal that can
only suckle members of another species, that would be strong
evidence against evolution. We don't see that, cuz none of this stuff
I'm gonna tell you is evidence against evolution, or ever been observed. That's one reason we
think evolution is true. If we didn't see genetic variations
in a species, cuz to get evolution, you have to have genetic variation. Then, if we could not take species
then show that through artificial selection that they had genetic variation,
that would cast your doubt around the ability at least natural selection,
or any process that causes variation. But, find again that every species
has ample genetic variation. If we see any adaptations that could not
have evolved in a step by step process, that's through gradual change,
and in complex adaptations, which bears on a question you might
ask later about intelligent design. That would count against Darwinism. And if we saw, I mean there's a lot. I'll just give one more. If we saw strong discords between
the relationships between organisms, that we see from their DNA sequences and
the relationships we see from their morphology, then that
would cast severe doubt on evolution. For example, show why using that
the DNA sequences of whales, in general were much more similar to those of
fish than they were to any other mammal. That would cause some problems for
evolution. But, of course, if you the phylogeny
based on DNA, you see whales fit right in there with other mammals and
fish are over here somewhere. So, I have a list when I
give a talk of a dozen observations that could refute
modern evolutionary biology. It's not a watertight theory
in the sense that there's nothing that could possibly refute. But none of these observations
have even been made. That's one reason why we
think Darwinism is true. It's had, as I say in the book, it's had a million chances to be wrong,
but it's always come out right. And when that happens we
consider something to be true in the scientific sense. >> Okay, that's great. Well as you've alluded, I have a couple,
the next couple of questions, the next three here are looking at some of the arguments that people
pose who are hostile to evolution. So, this next one's a little bit long. It says, some evolutionary biologists
come across as particularly hostile and condescending to
alternative points of view, insisting that everything is explained
by evolution and common ancestry, and even considering anything besides
reflects ignorance or stubbornness. In contrast, advocates for Intelligent
Design agree that evolution happens, but suggest that we should be open
to additional explanations rather than a singular one. How did evolutionary biologists justify
their certitude in a singular explanation for all of life? And relatedly,
why do they come across as so condescending to those who
even consider alternatives? >> Well, I suppose that's not
like the consensus of the class. Maybe it is, that scientists are
condescending, evolutionary biologists. I don't think we all are. That said, I think there is a bit
of truth in that characterization, but let me put that off for a second. I wanna take issue with the idea that
evolutionary biologists think that everything has to be
explained by evolution, because I don't think that's true. For example, there's culture. At least for humans, there is culture and
a lot of the aspects of human culture cannot be explained by evolution,
because they change so fast. Why there's Coke and Pepsi and
why we have Bach and Beethoven. How we build submarines. Those are all within our capabilities
as biologically evolved organisms. But those phenomena and
a number of cultural phenomena, like for example,
the institution of religion. Music, dancing,
things like that, literature. All of that are probably cultural
phenomena that--well they have to be consonant with what our genes
enable us to do, they're not evolved. We don't have genes, I don't think,
for writing literature. I don't think we have genes for
believing in God. I think that's a cultural institution. So, no,
not everything comes from evolution. Although a lot of our
biological characteristics do. And in animals that don't have culture,
like protozoans, for example, or plants, a lot of their
features do come from evolution. Okay, so I'm just saying that very
few evolutionary biologists think, in fact, none that I know of, think that
evolution explains everything in humans. Because we have this culture which
supersedes or, may supersedes evolution. In terms of the fact that people
reject intelligent design, and there may be additional explanations
besides the natural materialistic one of evolution, that there might
be an intelligent designer. That facilitates evolution. That's the view called sort
of theistic evolution, of which Intelligent Design is one view. And they say, well,
why reject that out of hand? Well, some scientists do. In fact that's the reason
why the courts reject it. Because they consider Creationism
as a form of religion. Which it really is. It's religiously motivated. But I don't rule it out of court. I mean I say Let's consider all
explanations for biological phenomena and see which ones work. So I'm one of the few scientists, I guess,
that say, let's consider the supernatural. We can test it. I mean, there have been tests of whether
the supernatural works in biology. One of these famous ones is intercessory
prayer, where there have been several studies where religious groups prayed for
people that where in the hospital. They were having operations, and there were control groups people weren't
prayed for or prayed for wrongly, etc. And it didn't work. So and if you have the view,
as the American Indians did, that dancing, doing particular dances would bring rain,
well, that's an assertion of
the supernatural that's also testable. You could see whether the dancing
would cause the rain. You could have a control where
the dances aren't done right. You could have no dances, etc. So if you have a formal religion or
a belief in supernatural that claims that the supernatural does
affect the real world. And most religious people do believe that. Then, at least, in principle, that becomes something that can
become empirically testable. You can see whether spiritual healing
works, whether prayer works, blah, blah, blah. And none of those tests have ever worked. And you can see whether the intelligent
design assertion, which is that there are features of biological
organisms that could not have evolved, must have been created
by an intelligent agent. You can also see whether those
things are worth considering. And I think that you should
consider that alternative because a lot of people believe it,
and test it. The problem is the prayer studies and
the rain dancing studies, well, there haven't been
any rain dancing studies. >> [LAUGH]
>> $1000, they wouldn't work. But well, like studies of ancestry
prayer and spiritual healing, intelligent design arguments, I reject
them because simply they haven't worked. And so they're bad science. And we don't know of any feature
of an organism that in principle could not have evolved in
an adaptive way from precursors. It's a God of the gaps argument. Just because we don't know
exactly how something evolved, we can't automatically say
it must have been designed. And now we're starting to find that some
of these features, and the flagella and blood clotting are the classic examples
used by intelligent design people. We're starting to find out ways in which
they could have indeed involved in a stepwise fashion, and that they're not so-called irreducibly
complex features after all. So I don't rule out
supernatural explanations. I think that science should consider them. I think science has considered them. I mean Newton, sorry Kepler and other
early astronomers thought that God was responsible for certain planetary motions. And so then it was later shown that
you didn't need God to do that. And the whole history of science has been
one in which supernatural explanations have been continuously discarded,
one after the other. So now the situation is we
don't really consider them, not because they're not worth considering,
but because they've never shown themselves to
be useful in understanding any phenomenon. But I'm still willing to consider them. If something happened, if prayer worked,
but it was only Jewish prayers, or Catholic prayers. Or if telepathy seemed to work or
spiritual healing seemed to work, then I for one would be willing
to consider the supernatural. But so far,
there's been no reason to do that. >> Okay, that's great, thank you. So this next one's kind
of a long question. In your book and on your blog, you present
many examples of cases that are not easily explained by design that are consistent
with long-term evolution. For example, you mentioned that the
recurrent pharyngeal nerve is an example of inefficient design. The appendix is an example
of a vestigial organ, and vitamin C producing
genes as dead in primates. If we take these examples at face value, they all seem like relics
of an evolutionary process. However, it's possible
that at least some and maybe many of these examples have
explanations that have not yet been found. For example, as you probably know, Dr.
William Parker at Duke University has said quote, the abundance of circumstantial
evidence makes a strong case for the role of the appendix as a place where
the good bacteria can live safe and undisturbed until they're needed. Such a function may outweigh
the risk of appendicitis. Others have argued that
the recurrent laryngeal nerve innervates tissues in the chest
in addition to the larynx. Thus making it perhaps somewhat or
very efficient and many supposed dead genes
are transcribed and have functions discovered much later as
shown with the N-CODE project recently. As such, some or
many of these examples are vestiges or bad design could be disproven
with future studies. How do you feel about this and
the evidence [INAUDIBLE]? >> That is a long question. There's three examples
specifically mentioned in there. I'll try to answer as briefly as I can. I mean,
there's a fallacious notion at work here, which is the vestigial organs
can't be useful for anything. And we've got others
that don't believe that. We believe that vestigial organs
are features of an organism that can be explained only by positing that they had
a different function in a common ancestor. That doesn't mean that those
organs cannot be co-opted for something else in a descendant. So if you find that an organ that's
said to be vestigial actually has some function, then that doesn't
mean that evolution is wrong. [LAUGH] And let me give you an example. So the wing of an ostrich, I mean, ostrich is like big feathers
versus the [INAUDIBLE] evolved. We know this from molecular work. And the he thought from organisms that
had wings with which they could fly, so do penguins. And in the case of penguins those
wings that used to be used for flying in the air in their ancestors
are now used for flying in the water. Does that mean that penguins that the
wings are evolved de novo are the result of creationism? Know that they're leftover remnants of the
ancestors of penguins that now have a new function, which is to propel
them through the water. The ostrich has wings. So ostriches can't fly because
their wings are too small. But they still use them in a way
that you could consider of them. In particular if you ever get
chased by an ostrich, and I have been, they put their wings out
to make themselves bigger and scarier. But they also use the wings to shade
their chicks in the African sun. They spread them out over the chicks. So you could say okay
they have a function. They're not vestigial. But really, I mean why does an ostrich
have these wings in the first place? Because we know they evolved
from birds of flight. To give a more extreme example, look at the kiwi which is another
flightless bird found in New Zealand. It has wings that are like that big
that are hidden under these hairy like feathers. And they have no known function at all. And they can't do anything. So, [LAUGH] the reasonable thing is, and if you look at these wings and
dissect them, you'll see they have little sort of bones in them that are of
course the bones of flying birds. We have the whole gamut in
there from penguin wings, which are functional
to flying under water. Ostrich wings, which you can't really
fly anywhere, but you could use them in an adaptive way, to the kiwi,
where they're just no use at all. It's just, and
they all have the same bones in them. It's hard to see that that says anything
except that those birds had common, flying ancestors. The alternative is there is a creator
that created all of these wings using exactly the same bones and
to do different things in different birds. And in the kiwi, they're there,
they don't do anything, okay? [LAUGH] In terms of the appendix,
yeah, there is a residual, probably, immunological, or
health function, in the appendix. We think that there's some tissue in
there that's useful in the immune system. And they may harbor some useful bacteria. Like, when we get rid of our gut
bacteria through antibiotics, they may be replenished by bacteria
that are hidden in the appendix. But, remember the appendix evolved
before we had antibiotics. So, [LAUGH] you gotta remember that
the appendix evolved its vestigiality not now when have doctors that can
take it out when it's inflamed. But way back in our ancestors on the
savanna, three or four million years ago, when it's estimated that between 15%
of people or more got appendicitis. And when you got appendicitis on
the savanna, you were dead basically. There were no doctors to take
out an inflamed appendix. So there was a huge cost Of having
an appendix based at the time and that's why it's gotten smaller and
smaller and smaller. Now it's probably gonna stay because
now there's no problem with having one. If it gets inflamed, at least in most
places in the world, doctors take it out. But if we look at our relatives, like
plant-eating things or even the orangutan, the appendix serves as a large sack
in which plant material ferments and breaks down,
before it goes back into the intestine. And it's clear that that's
where our appendix came from. It may have a residual function,
but it's hard for me to believe that this tiny
immune function it has, or replenishment of bacteria from having
them wiped out of your gut by antibiotics which is something that didn't happen
when the appendix evolved, that was huge mortality deficit that occurred from
having an appendix on the savannah. So yeah, it's not a good thing to have. It's not there because it's in general
good for us, at least it was not good for our ancestors. It's very difficult to make a case
that having an appendix was good and that's why it's getting
smaller because it's bad. Now in terms of the dead
genes in the ENCODE project. I had to look this sort of up this
morning because there's been seven papers in nature in the past couple
weeks on the ENCODE project, and it doesn't really say that dead
genes are really functional. Classic examples of the dead genes I
give in my book are the last gene in the process of synthesizing vitamin C,
which in most mammals is useful. They make vitamin C in
their metabolic pathway. We don't cuz the last step
in the pathway is blocked. The gene that makes that last step from
the precursor of vitamin C to vitamin C has a mutation which makes the enzyme
inactive and so we can't make vitamin C. That's why we have to get it in our diet. That's why sailors got scurvy on trips. They had to eat limes to get the vitamin
C etc., so that gene's dead. You can see that the gene is alive, it actually does not have that
mutation in some of our relatives. We happen to have the same dead
gene as gorillas by the way and a little bit of a different one from
orangutans, which testifies to the fact that the gene was killed in
one of our primate ancestors. So the supposition is well, maybe the gene
is still useful because even though it doesn't make protein, the RNA transcript
of that gene might have some other use. And that's what the ENCODE project
is starting to tell us for a lot of, and not necessarily for
the vitamin C gene. From a lot of parts of the gene
that we thought were nonfunctional actually produce RNA transcripts,
they conserve and regulate other genes, and that may be true for
the dead vitamin C gene. I don't know. Even if that were true,
they would not say that that thing is dead is evidence for, that dead gene
is evidence for evolution because it is. I'm not sure we know where that
gene makes an RNA transcript but we know for
bloody well sure it does not make protein. It was there to make the enzyme that
converted one thing to another. So what has happened if it makes
a transcript that is useful for some other thing,
is the same thing that happened at birth. Something that was eliminated by evolution
for one purpose is collected for another purpose. The only way you can explain that we
have a gene that codes for enzyme that, in other species, actually produces
an enzyme that makes the vitamin C, but we don't, is to positively evolved from
ancestors in which that gene was active. There's no other way around that,
no matter what the gene does now. And it's the same for every dead
gene that I talk about it my book. Not only the vitamin C gene, but the
olfaction genes that were useful in our smelling in our ancestors and
are no longer useful for us because we're a visual species and an
auditory one rather than an olfactory one. And the genes that make yolk protein
in our relatives which are birds and reptiles. They don't operate in humans. They're still there and they're dead. They don't produce a protein. They may produce an RNA transcript that
could be co-opted for something else. But the reason those genes were there in
the first place is they produced protein that made yolk for the embryo. So the ENCODE project, to me,
is a very interesting result but it doesn't say anything
about denying evolution, because the genes that we thought
were dead actually do something else. That all this apprehension
that vestigial characteristics in order to prove evolution can't do
anything at all and that's not true. Vestigial characteristics proves
evolution have to been explained only by the central man ancestor, but they
could well have been used by evolution to do something new after they become
useless for the first function. So that would be my explanation. >> That's great.
The last question that was submitted is can you please come up close to
the screen and wiggle your ears [LAUGH]? >> [INAUDIBLE] ear wiggling is
a vestigial trait and believe me, it can't be useful for anything. >> [LAUGH]
>> In evolution for a trait to be useful is it's adaptive. And for it to be adaptive,
it has to increase your reproduction. And I can't see any way that wiggling
your ears can increase your reproduction. It certainly never helped
me acquire any mates. >> [LAUGH]
>> It's there because we inherited the vestigial traits,
the muscles that our ancestors. If you look at their cat and their dog, they can move their ears
around to locate sounds. We don't really do that. We don't need to do that because we're
mostly a visually-oriented species, but we still, not everybody has these. I mean,
that's another sign of a vestigial trait. And everybody has these three muscles in
fully-developed form that enable them to wiggle their ears. I have them too. So when I wiggle my ears, I'm just
showing you there's this vestigial trait that remains in some humans but
is of no conceivable use, at least in terms of
facilitating reproduction. And so I'll try to get up to
the screen and wiggle them. I don't know, can you see that okay? I haven't started wiggling yet. I'm just wondering if you can-
>> Yeah. I can see your ear. >> All right, here we go. >> Yeah.
Looks great. [LAUGH]
>> My visual demonstration of evolution for you. >> There you go. Well, Dr. Coyne,
thank you very much for joining us and we really appreciate your time and
your efforts. And thank you for a great book, too. >> Hey Mike, pleasure. And to the students out there I say
learn evolution and study hard. >> Excellent, take care. >> Bye.