Hello, and welcome back to introduction
to genetics and evolution. In this video, we'll be talking about
some of the very basic history of and understanding of inherit, and I'm referring specifically
in this case to genetic inherit. If you think back hundreds of years ago, people understood that there was something
being passed on from parents to offspring. This was true long before they
knew anything about genes or anything about DNA being the genetic
material or anything like that. Why is that? How did we know that there
is some sort of information passed on from parents to offspring? Well the answer is quite simple. If you look around, people tend to
look like their parents or their kids. So familial resemblance is obvious, that
we all the time see people and say oh, you look far more like your
kids relative to somebody else. Now some of that could be that
you are in a common environment. You live in the same house or
in the same community as your parents do. However, we don't see as as much resemblance in families
when you have adoptees. You might have some, but
quite often you can have adopted kids that don't look at all
similar to their parents. They also may have very little
correlation in other traits, such as dietary preferences or IQ, which is the intelligence coefficient,
things like that. So, did people try to explain this? Well, Charles Darwin attributed
this familiar resemblance to some unknown factor here for to, as a gemmules. And there's a quote here as you see on
the slide from a letter to Francis Galton. If I ask myself how you derive, and
where you place the innumerable gemmules contained within the spermatozoa formed by
a male animal during its whole life, yeah, he said male, I cannot answer myself. Now, actually there was some
information at this point about genetic inheritance from the famous
pea experiments by Gregor Mendel. However, Darwin did not know about them. Now, it's important to
understand genetics. And it would've been actually very
helpful for Darwin to understand genetics to help us understand the process
of evolution as well. There's something that comes out if you
don't really understand genetics that becomes a problem for evolution. So let's look at this. Imagine that you had some tall
individuals in a population and some short individuals in a population. And let's say that offspring were
always intermediate to the two parents. So if you have a tall parent,
let's say somebody who's six foot, let's say a six foot tall mom and a five
foot tall dad, would you be five foot six? Would you be exactly in the middle? Well let's hypothesize that
that was true for a minute. Or in this picture right here let's
imagine that white flowers and red flowers gave rise to pink flowers. What would happen if this happened
over time, over and over again? Eventually everybody in the population is going to come back to
some sort of average. Basically, you'll lose all
variation in the population. This is referred to as the problem
of blending inheritance. Let me give you a numerical example
just to illustrate this point. So here's the numerical example, now
let's imagine you're looking at height or any sort of continuous trait,
and let's say for example you're thinking
five foot x inches. The numbers depicted here are the number
of inches after five feet. So we have here, a dad who's 5'4'',
a mom who's 5'9''. Dad who's 5'5'', mom who's 5'8''. Dad who's 5'2'', mom who's 5'6''. Okay, so
basically any sort of continuous trait. In this case we're having
it range from zero to nine. So each of these individuals is gonna have
a kid and were going to assume the kid has an exactly intermediate
trait to the two parents. So if the dad is 5'4'' and
mom is 5'9'' the kid is 5'6'' 1/2''. If the dad is 5'8'' mom is,
sorry dad is 5'5'' and mom is 5'8'', again the kid is 6 and
a half inches etc. So look what's happened between the first
generation and the second generation. In the first generation we had
a range from zero to nine, the second generation we've
lost a lot of this range. We're now going from 2 to 6.5. So what happens if we iterate
this over multiple generations? Well a lot more variation gets lost. So here I just took this person,
put them there, this person put them there,
this one here, this one there, etc., etc. And you see as we iterate this more we
initially had this range from 2 to 6.5, but as we take more and
more averages across the population, the range has now gone down to
2.75 to 6.5 in generation three, and even further in generation
four to 2.875 to 5.875. So if we iterate this over and
over again, an infinite number of times, we will eventually lose all
variation in the population. Everybody will be exactly intermediate
in the same height and if you don't have variation, then you can't actually
have evolution by natural selection. Because there's no trait being inherited
that allows for greater survival or reproduction, since everybody is the same,
everybody is presumably surviving or reproducing. The same with respect to whatever
it is they're inheriting, but more fundamentally, since when we
look in any natural population, we do see variation and we do see
variation that appears to be heritable. This poses a problem for
understanding heredity more generally and one possible solution
to this was tossed out. This was from Jean-Baptiste Lamarck. So this idea that variation in
some way needs to be created or renewed within populations for
evolution to happen. So what Lamarck suggested is something
along the lines of what's called the inheritance of acquired characters. Now this right here is a quote
from Lamarck's writing. The idea here is that, basically, if you use something it then can grow and
then that gets passed on to offspring. So some anecdotal examples would
be something like a blacksmith. Blacksmith is using their
muscles all the time to, you know, to work with their metal. They seem to have these big muscles, and if you look kids of blacksmith's
often have these big muscles too. Same sort of thing may have been suggested
for giraffes that in stretching to reach the leaves on the trees, they are going to
stretch their necks up and somehow this use of neck and stretching it actually
gets it to be passed onto the offspring. So they then had offspring
with slightly longer necks. This was the idea that was tossed out. Darwin actually adopted this idea for gemmules in some of his later
editions of on the origin of species. Now you may know that this
is not exactly correct and I'll show you one case where I messed up. If you go back to my tenth
grade high school class, my teacher Mr. Bennett asked a question. He said, if you were to cut
someone's left arm off and they have kids would they one or two arms? That was one question on a quiz. The next question is, if you were
to cut someone's left arm off, and cut their kid's left arm off,
repeating for 20 generations, would the 21st generation kid have one or
two arms. Well, I got the first one correct,
cuz I said the answer was two. Just cuz you lose an arm doesn't make you
lose an arm and have kids with two arms. But somehow I thought, maybe this would get passed on if
this happened over and over again. And this is much more along
the lines of what Lamarck had. Now, that is not true. In fact, if you were to cut
somebody's left arm, repeat that for 20 generations, 21st generation
kid would still have two arms. Now the reason for this and the reason
that variation is not in fact lost, the way I portrayed it in
the context of lending inheritance, is because we have
particulate inheritance. We are actually transmitting bits
of genetic information that remain distinct in the offspring. We'll talk about this much more the next
lecture, exactly how this works. But, just to put a couple of points
on this, we are not a simple copy of our parents, nor are we necessarily
the mid point of our parents. It is quite possible to have two
tall parents have a short kid or two short parents have a tall kid. Irrespective of any sort of environmental
or dietary effects, anything like that. You can also have blue-eyed
offspring from brown-eyed parents. This is very frequently observed. And basically, traits can be masked. It's because these particulate inheritance
pieces can be masked by other particulate. Also, genetic diseases can crop up or
just new traits in general, it doesn't have to be disease. Now, all of this was known long before, very long before we knew that
DNA carried this genetic code. And, a lot of this comes back to
this fellow here, Gregor Mendel. We'll talk about him in much more
detail on the next set of lectures. Now, I do wanna stress one point. That inheritance is actually similar
across most animals, and many plants, and even fungi. Now many species are diploid. This is a very important word for
you to know. Diploid means that you have two copies of the entire genetic code in your body,
right? You have one gene copy
that came from one parent, and you have another gene copy that
came from the other parent, okay? Now, you're not intermediate, but
you actually have these two distinct, complete sets of gene copy for
every gene in your whole genome. Now this is true not just for you but
again for most animals and many plants and fungi and in fact many of the same
proteins and structures are involved in inheritance in you as in various plants
and fungi and as well as other animals. And it's because of this
that people tend to use model organisms to
understand inheritance. We say model organisms, these are animals
or plants that people work with, or fungi as well,
to try to understand genetics. But we're not necessarily
interested in them themselves, but we're using them to understand
genetics more broadly, because we presume that it applies
very similarly across all species. So many of you know, for
example, the famous fruit fly. People don't work on fruit flies
because they love fruit flies or especially care about fruit flies or
want to kill fruit flies. They use it because they are easy
to work with in a laboratory. Same sorts of things for
mouse, for Xenopus frogs, for zebrafish, for this plant right here,
it's Arabidopsis thaliana. So this is why people use model organisms
because patterns of inheritance and the genes involving inheritance tend to
be the same across most living species. Now let me just give you an idea
of what's to come, foreshadowing. So these are some questions
to be thinking about. I'm not asking you them just now. So how do offspring get
genes from their parents? Basically, how do these single copies of
all the genes in the genome from your dad and from your mom come together and
fuse into what becomes your gene. Hm, and
are traits controlled by one gene alone? Is there a single eye color gene. Is there a single diabetes gene? Is there a single cancer gene,
things like that, or are there many genes that
contribute to these traits? And you can probably guess
the answer to that one. It's the second. And finally, this is again what I hope to be getting to
you by the end of the genetics section. How do we find genes
associated with traits? We'll come back to these points and I hope
you're enjoying this, thank you very much.