Hello, and welcome back to introduction
to genetics and evolution. In the previous videos we looked at how
to study the process of recombination. And specifically, how we can leverage
recombination to actually map genes associated with diseases. And again, as I have said
several times we are looking for an association between alleles
at markers such as these HAPMAP snit markers that we discussed and
a phenotype such as disease status that is essentially what we're
trying to do with genetic mapping. Now what we're gonna do in this video
is we're actually gonna try to map simple genetic traits. So traits controlled by one gene
that have a very large effect on that trait relative to
genetic markers in a cross. So we can actually use HapMap markers just
like we used the Drosophila mutations in previous videos to map simple genetics. So you remember we did these problems
using these three genetic markers, A, B, and C. And we did the case of the test cross
with an individual that was heterozygous for all three. So, big A little a, big B little b,
big C little b, crossed with somebody who is homozygous, little a little a,
little b little b, little c little c. Now, we can imagine that A and B are SNIP
markers so they necessarily have two or more alleles and that they have
a known location in the genome. And what we can say now is
maybe C is the disease gene. So what we're trying to actually
do with a lot of genetic mapping, this isn't all of mapping but
part of mapping, is determine whether C, the disease gene,
is between a certain pair of markers. And secondarily, about how far is it? Is it, for example, between A and
B, and if so, is it closer to A, is it closer to B? Or is it off to one side? Is it maybe out past A,
and further away from B? That is genetic mapping. So let me illustrate this with an example. I will be using concepts very much like
what we did with the Drosophila mapping of genes. Let's use sickle cell anemia. Now, this disease is recessive, meaning you have to have two copies of
the mutant type to exhibit the disease. Alternatively, you only have one
copy if you're a heterozygous, we refer to you as a carrier. That means that you probably had a parent
who had the disease, for example. Not necessarily, but you probably did. Now, let's imagine you're surveying a lot
of families and you have multiple cases of carriers, these individual
that we know are heterozygous for the disease having kids
with affected individuals. When I say affected individuals I mean
ones who actually have the disease. So you're crossing someone
heterozygous for the disease, the carrier or somebody homozygous for
the disease so this is again just like
the test cross we did before. Now let's say you have the genome
types for the parents and for the offspring now you don't know
what the gene is causing the disease. This is a very important point. You do not know what or
where the gene is causing disease. When I say you have the genotypes for
the parents and offsprings, I mean you have their
genotypes for a bunch of genetic markers. You don't know where among those
markers the disease causing gene is. So let's focus on two genetic
markers on chromosome 11. Let's say that you've already, from
something else, you already have some idea that this disease is caused by mutation,
or chromosome 11. Which actually is true, by the way,
for single cell anemia. Let's say you have two markers, let's
say the A marker is at this point, and there's a picture of
chromosome 11's chromosome. And say the A marker is at this location, I just made this location
up don't worry about that. That's a big A, big A might be
an individual's homozygous for the letter C for
the nucleotide C in that position. Big A little a has T at one copy,
and C at one copy. And little a,
little a has T at both copies. This is irrelevant. I just wanted to give
you some idea of what I mean when I'm saying these
snip markers and [INAUDIBLE]. So this is something just to make it
more real in the context of it being a [INAUDIBLE]. The important thing is that A is over
here on the chromosome and B in contrast, a little bit lower down on the chromosome. So, what are we trying to do? We're trying to see is the gene causing
sickle cell anemia between A and B, is it down below B, or
is it at that little area above A? That's what we're trying to figure out. So, let's say that you have some data now
from the sets of families I mentioned. And this is what the family
data looks like. Now, again we have the genotypes just for
A and B. We don't know anything about C except
by virtue of disease status, okay. So, initials are big A,
little a, big B, little b. So, you know, they're heterozygous for
both the A and B markers. 416 of them were healthy,
and one was diseased, okay? So, most of them tend to be healthy
if you're heterozygous for both. Those are little a, little a,
little b, little b. Most of them, or actually, all of them,
in this case, are a disease. If you're big A, little a, little b,
little b, so you're homozygous for little b, but you're heterozygous for
the a marker. You're mostly healthy,
there's a couple of diseased individuals. And this case, little a, little a, Big B,
little b, most of them are diseased. So, look at this for just a minute. And speculate whether
you think marker A is closer to the disease-causing mutation or
marker B is. Again, remember mapping is the looking for an association between genotype and
phenotype. So what you wanna do in
looking at this right now, it's just like the problem
in a previous video. Look and see. Does your genotype just
at A predict the disease? Does your genotype just
at B predict the disease? All right, let's take a look now. So, at A, just looking at A, or
actually let's start with B. Just at B, big B, little b. So this one's big B, little b. Almost all of them are healthy. This one down here is also big B little b. Almost all of them are diseased. This one's little b little b. Almost all of them are diseased. This one's little b little b, and
almost all of them are healthy. So b really doesn't predict
the genotype very well at all. What about A? Well this one's big A little a and
almost all healthy. This one's also a big A little a and
almost all healthy. This one's little a little a and all
diseased this one's little a little a and almost all disease so clearly in this
case A the genotype at the A marker is more predictive of whether you have the
disease than the genotype of the B marker. So we can assume that A is probably
closer to this disease causing mutation. And we haven't said whether
it's between A and B or not. It could be in that little area above A,
as I said before. What we can do if, and
this is an assumption, if this is a simple genetic trait. Meaning a trait that is fully explained by
a single gene having a very large effect. What we can do is we can split this
section up, this whole section over here. And just infer what's going on
at the disease causing mutation. So we're saying that these ones
are healthy, and this one is diseased. Well if you only get the disease when
you have the mutation then this one must necessarily be little c, little c. And this one over here must
necessarily be big C little c alright. Because these ones are carriers,
they're healthy, these ones are diseased. So let's break that up. Again we have another gene causing disease
so we're just splitting this row up. So we're taking this original problem
where we're looking at two marks and basically now looking at three. The third being what we're inferring to
be happening at the disease causing gene. I split this up relative to
disease status and that was it. So what we can do is we can split up all
these other ones like this one right here. These ones necessarily are big
C little c there aren't they? These ones would be little c, little c. And we can continue the same
process that I just did. So I just broke up everything here from the previous slide into
the set of individuals. And again, we're assuming that
big C little c are healthy. They're carriers of the disease, but
they don't actually exhibit this disease. And little c little c,
in this case, are all healthy. So, without doing any math,
without doing any math at all, I want you to tell me
the order of the genes here. Is C the disease causing
mutation between A and B? Is it off past B or is it off past A? Very simple. What you do in this case is
you just try to figure out which one is the double recombinant and
from that and since you know the phase, you can
identify which gene is in the middle. Double recombinants
are always the rarest class. In this case the rarest class
will be these right here. Now when we look at this, which two of
these genes are in the same phase and what's the third one that's in a different
phase relative to the parents? So, here are the parentals, and we can confirm that is actually
the parental phase cuz that's most common. And, we look over here,
the rarest two have C, being coming from the other chromosome. Whereas the capitals are together,
just as they should be. So little a and little b, big A and big B,
C is necessarily the double recombinant, so we must have had something like this
to get the double recombination event. So the order must be B, ACB. So C is, in fact, in the middle. Now what we could do is from those numbers
you saw, and you can do do this for practice is you want. You can go back and actually calculate
the recombination fractions. The recombination fraction between A and
C is only 0.8 centimorgans. Or if you calculate it
directly it's 0.008. Between the C and B is 15.1%
recombination or 15.1 centimorgans. So we can infer from this
since A was at 11p15.6, B is at 11p12.3,
C is probably at or near 11p15.5. In fact this gene is actually
well known to be at 11p15.5 and it actually has already been mapped and
identified. Now let me conclude this video by just
recapping one very important point, the goal of genetic mapping is to localize
alleles and genes that cause disease. And what your trying to do is your
trying to find where is that mutant allele like which gene has it? 'Cuz, again, the genes don't came labeled, even when you have the full
human genome sequence. The genes do not come labeled. Some markers will be
associated with disease. And those ones that show that
strong association, where, alleles at those markers, the genotype at
those markers, will be associated with. Whether or not you have a disease. It will predict whether or
not you have a disease. Those are ones that will be
near the disease causing gene. Some markers will not be associated or
be very weakly associated with it. And those are the ones that are likely
far away from the disease causing. I hope that makes sense, and we'll follow
up on this next time with looking at Mapping through studies
of population data. I hope you'll join us.