Hello, and welcome back to
Introduction to Genetics in Evolution. We talked in some of the previous
videos about mutations and about some of the complications beyond
standard simple single gene inherit. What I'd like to do now is come
back to mutations just briefly. Talk about mutation rates or
essentially how often do mutations happen. I mentioned briefly previously
that they happen a lot, but let's actually put
some numbers on this. Well again, let me re-emphasize, all genetic variations
started as new mutations. Now, there are two questions
people often what to know. There is actually a 3rd one that we won't
talk about how often good mutations arise, but people often want to know, how do
often any sort of new mutations arise. How often is there any sort of
alteration to a genetic code? Like, do you for example have any
mutations relative to your parents? Or do your kids have
mutations relative to you? And then related to that how
often do bad new mutations arise? Do you have any bad mutations
relative to your parents? Or will your kids have some
bad mutations relative to you? Theoretically we could do the same thing
we good new mutations but they are so infrequent and hard to measure we probably
can't do that very easily in this context. Now how do you measure a mutation rate so
how do you measure a rate of new mutation. Well mutation rate is typically measured
as per generation and often per base. But, again, measuring this you have to
define your parameters very clearly. You have to standardize by unit of time,
which is typically the per generation, and you have to identify what
kinds of mutations count. Like, are you identifying
the mutation rate from one specific base to
another specific base? Like the mutation rate of a particular
site from A to G in particular. Or do you mean just from that base to any
different base, from A to anything but A, so this would include a mutation to G,
a mutation to T, a mutation to C. The other thing, too, we often talked
about this in the context of DNA sequence, there are other kinds of
genetic mutations too. There are things like inversions, this is
when you have a stretch on the chromosome flip literally,
like completely reverse it's order. So all the same nucleotide sequences
there but the order of it has changed. Or translocation, something where a piece
goes from one chromosome to another. Or deletions, just a segment of
DNA that just gets erased out and then the two ends get stuck together. Do you count those, or
do you not count them? And what people traditionally did,
if you go further back in time, is people would measure mutation rates in
the context of anything in a gene that yields a phenotype. Now this of course ignores a lot of
neutral changes and things like that. So you have to define what
you're talking about. Typically speaking, people tend to focus on this when
they're looking at a mutation rate. A specific base to any different base. So let's say for example that you know at
one particular site you started with an A, then it changes to something but that. So we'll use that for
the rest of this lecture. So how do you get this
mutation rate per generation? Well, again as I said, we'll use this
base to any other base definition. And what people often do is they'll get
a sequence of either a whole genome after a known number of generations or
a big stretch of DNA. So lets imagine that this
is a ten base genome. This is obviously ridiculously small. A-C-A-G-G-C-A-T-T-T Ok? And after one generation when you look at
the offspring and its A-C-A-G-G-C-A-T-C-T. So what do we have here? We have one mutation. How many bases did we look at? We looked at ten bases. How many generations
was it one generation. So in this case the mutation
rate would be 0.1 mutations per base pair per generation. So that's the kind of thing you can do. This is something that's commonly
done in model organisms such as for example C elegans. This is a classic worm example. Now another thing people do to compare
sequences from existing species and estimate the number of generations. So for example,
if you could get a guesstimate of how many generations there are that
distinguish humans from chimps. And you counted all the base
differences between humans and chimps, you could get a mutation
rate from that as well. So let me give you
a couple of real numbers. This is an estimate of mutation rate
from worms, the C elegans model systems. So it's 2.1 x 10 to the -8. This sounds very small but,
trust me, it's bigger than it seems. 10 to the -8 mutations
per base per generation. Now, what would this actually mean if
you apply this mutation rate to humans? Well, the human genome size
is 3.1 x 10 to the 9 bases. So how many mutations, if you just extrapolate directly from
this mutation rate, to this genome size. How many mutations on
average would you expect individuals to get in one generation
relative to their parents? The answer from this is 65. [LAUGH]
So that is not a small
number of new mutations. As I said,
mutations are happening all the time. And amazingly this finding
is absolutely confirmed. That you see 2012 study from
various Icelandic families found, on average, 63 new mutations. This shows the value of extrapolating
from model system studies. That estimate of 65 came ultimately
from these studies of C elegans worms. And from that I just did some math to
calculate what we would expect to see in humans and in fact we see a very, very, very close number to what I predicted
from the C elegans studies in human. Now, interestingly, I didn't mention this before, there's
a very strong effect of father's age. Now, most new mutations that humans get tend to be from their fathers
rather than from their mothers. The reason for that is because in
the production of sperm you have many more cell divisions than you do
in the production of eggs. So there's many more opportunities for
an error to come, or for a mutation to come in. And in fact, what you see looking at this, there's
a very strong age effect of the father. So here on the x-axis, is the age of the father at
the time of conceiving the child. On the y-axis is the number of new
mutations found in that child. And we see is that there's a very dramatic
increase as the father goes from 20, 25, 30, 35, 40 you see way way more and
new mutations in the kids. In fact for every year of the fathers age you see on
average about two more new mutations. And this holds up with disease studies,
that people see higher incidence of diseases like autism and other things
like that in kids from older fathers. So this is something to consider and it has definitely societal
implications as well. So, coming back to what I said before,
your brother is a mutant. But sadly, so are you. So you can call him mutant, but
he can call you one as well. But very importantly, these mutations,
these new mutations arise and they introduce a lot of variation
into natural populations. This ties back in with the previous
video I just emphasized. Now again, what happens when
these new mutations come up? It's a new mutation, it's not been found
before, and you have the birth of a SNP, you have this new sort
of variation out there. Now these new mutations may spread,
they may be found in other individuals, they may be lost, they may be lost by
natural selection because it's bad if it causes instant death,
obviously it will be lost very quickly. And maybe you lost from other forces. Maybe you lost just from a random event. There again, the usual single
mutation gets hit by a truck when they're still young. Now, while they're present,
these new mutations, these new variations will have
a frequency in the population. This is something that will be very
important when we get into population genetics, that alleles are present
at a frequency within populations. You can see this as an example, here allele frequencies of blood types in
the United States just as an illustration. About 24% of the alleles out there are A, 10% are B, 66% are O. Okay so if you took just whats going on,
they took just everybody's chromosome and just lined them up you'd count on average
this numbers in the United States. Now these are the allele frequencies but there's also an underlying
genotype frequency, right. That a subset of these individuals
have to be AA well its obviously A. AA versus AO a subset of
AB a subset of OO etc. So you can put all these things together,
these genotypes. The fraction of individuals that
have a particular genotype have some sort of frequency in the population. That is what is studied in
the field of population. We'll come back to that far more
extensively in later videos. But again all genetic variations
started as new mutations. Now, the tougher question is how
often do bad new mutations arise? Well there have been
estimates of this as well. The deleterious mutation rate is,
again, fairly high. If you look at chromosomal anomalies, things like just severe chromosomal
disruptions, these happen quite a bit. They probably have a very immediate effect
on offspring and result in miscarriage. So as many of you know, on the order of about half of
pregnancies are spontaneously aborted. It's estimated that maybe around half of
the ones that were spontaneously aborted had some sort of genetic reason for it. They had some sort of chromosomal anomaly. They got too many copies of one, or
things stuck together that weren't supposed to stick together,
things like that. These are ones that you can't actually
measure because it happens so frequently there's no way to tell. But a lot of other bad
mutations are far more subtle, they don't have such severe effects
that they just make an embryo die or they're masked because they're recessive. Well, current estimates suggests that
on average, and this is true for humans as well, there are one to two
bad new mutations per generation, per individual, right? So I'm sorry, but
you're probably a bad mutant too. But I hope you'll come back nonetheless,
and watch the next video. Thank you very much.