Hello, and welcome back to introduction
to genetics and evolution. In today's lectures,
I'd like to take a little foray into a very exciting
subarea of evolutionary biology. And that's the intersection
between evolutionary biology and the study of animal behavior. In this first lecture, we'll look at
optimality and adaptive feeding behavior. But first, let's talk a little bit
more broadly about animal behavior. Animal behavior is a very,
very active research area, and particularly studying animal
behavior in an evolutionary context. You can study animal behavior
from many different approaches, you can look at hormonal basis for animal
behavior, you can look at neural basis for animal behavior. What we want to look at now, rather than
proximate cause, is we want to look at the ultimate reason for
why animals behave the way that they do. Now behavior, as I mentioned, integrates
these many different aspects of biology, such as physiology or hormones and nerves, genetics, ecology,
and fundamentally evolution. Now some areas where evolutionary thinking
is applied to the study of animal behavior is in the context of survival or
avoiding predation. Obviously, very important for
passing on your genes, is that you don't get killed early. Feeding or foraging behavior, it's obvious this is what's
happening at the other end of this. [LAUGH] Choosing where to live,
communicating, reproductive behavior, sexual selection. This one we'll talk about in
a different context much later on, but not here in these videos. Parental care and social behavior. So we'll dabble into a couple of these
in the videos that you have here. The ones in this particular video that
we'll talk about are looking at optimality theory, or specifically, how you can get
the maximal effect for the minimal cost. Which is what we would infer, that natural selection would push
a species to ultimately be able to do. And we'll look at applying optimality
theory to the study of feeding behavior, and why feeding behavior
is often adaptive. Now as you know, the evidence for
natural selection abounds across species. So let's look at the example
of the Eurasian oystercatcher. Now this species feeds on mussels. So, not muscles like this, but mussels like the small clams
that you have over here. Now, there's an optimal size of mussel for
this bird to pursue. If the mussel is too small,
they're not gonna get enough nourishment. It's not worth it for them to spend the energy to open something
that's gonna give them almost no energy. If it's too large, it becomes extremely
hard to open, at which point they'll expend tons of energy and may never
get any nutrients out of it as well. So there should be some optimal
intermediate size mussel, these oystercatchers would be
selecting that would be, in principle, selected by natural selection. Now, people have ran a bunch of models and they suggested that oystercatchers
should pick 50 millimeter size mussel. That was the prediction. From these initial models they looked for
this, and in fact there was not a good
fit of the models to the data. In fact, these oystercatchers
were picking smaller mussels. So they refined the mussels, and
they predicted with this refinement that the oystercatchers should pick 30 to 45
millimeter mussels because the larger ones are covered with barnacles and
that may make them harder to open. Now in fact, the birds do prefer
30 to 45 millimeter mussels, so with this revision of the model,
the model fits the data. This should be causing you a little
bit of concern when somebody just manipulates a model to make
it fit the data, right? Well, there is this view that
selection is everywhere, right? That structures and behaviors are optimally designed by
natural selection for their function. And whenever we see something
that's not optimal, we infer a trade-off or
some compromise among competing demand. Now this is a little bit of a risky thing
because basically you're making it so every possible observation will
eventually fit your model. Now Gould and
Lewontin criticized this, and referred to this as
the Adaptationist Program. They suggested that,
many researchers were doing this, they were interpreting data by assuming
the near omnipotence of natural selection in forging organic design and
fashioning the best among possible worlds. This is often referred to as adaptive
storytelling by people who don't like it. That, we see something and just make up an
adaptive story until it seems to fit and then say oh, that must have been it. Yeah, yeah, that's it. [LAUGH] That's not good science. Unfortunately, this kind of thing
has happened for a very long time. Overinterpretation goes
back over a hundred years. In fact, if you look back before 1909, Spencer asked Galton to
look at his fingerprints. But Galton said he didn't know
the functions of these patterns, and many people had studied this, dissecting
the fingers of unborn children trying to study their prints, and things like that. Now Spencer suggested, well the ridges
obviously, this is an important word here, obviously functions to protect
the sweat glands in the valleys. Sounds like that makes sense. Problem is, the glands are actually
in the ridges themselves, so actually doesn't make sense at all. [LAUGH] Science has been referred to
by Thomas Henry Huxley as the organized common sense, where many a beautiful
theory was killed by an ugly fact. In fact,
despite the use of optimality theory, and optimality theory is actually
a good thing when applied properly, there are many traits and behaviors out
there that are not perfectly adapted. Now there are many reasons why traits or behaviors may not be perfectly adapted
as we see them now in the wild. Well one possibility is that
there's been a failure for the appropriate mutations to occur. That, if the mutation for making it
just that much better never happened, then it's stuck where it is, right? You can have single genes that
cause multiple phenotypic effects. This referred to as pleitropy, where for example, an allele may be good for
one trait but bad for a different trait. So it's that there's this
sort of trade-off going on. There is a possibility that ultimately
the trade will be perfectly adapted, but there hasn't been sufficient time for
selection to operate. Or the environment keeps changing and
it's this moving target that makes it very hard for a trait to be
optimally adapted for any particular. There are many, many other reasons. This is just a subset of those. But very importantly, optimality
predictions should be tested and judged, not just presumed. Optimality, when I use this term, is the assumption that by knowing exactly
how natural selection's acting on this trait, we should be able to predict
exactly what the trait should look like. Now let me give you an example where
there was some misunderstanding again, in terms of understanding a trait. This is the example of the oxpecker. This is a bird that you often see
on top of an ox, for example. They live on large mammals, they're thought to feed
somewhat on ticks at least. And the dogma that was repeated for many,
many years is it was mutually beneficial for the oxpecker bird and the ox to be
associated because the bird is picking off these ticks that are bad for the animal,
and so the mammal just leaves him there. Unfortunately, there were no good
tests of this until around 2000. And what happened then is people started
exploring whether the cattle that had oxpeckers had more or
less ticks than cattle without oxpeckers. Now if the oxpeckers are picking off
the ticks, then you would assume the cattle that have the oxpecker
bird should have fewer ticks, right? Well in fact, tests showed there is
no significant reduction in tick load when you had oxpecker. So they tested this multiple times and
there was no significant reduction. In fact, further tests showed that
these oxpeckers were actually enlarging open wounds and
drinking the blood from the ox. That's not good. That's not mutualistic at all. Something very much to
the benefit of the bird, but to the detriment of the large mammal. Now the question you might wanna ask is,
why do the cattle tolerate these birds hanging on
them that are opening their wounds? Well I asked my class this back in 2012,
but here's a set of some of the responses. On the negative side,
somebody suggested that the hosts don't actually tolerate the oxpeckers, but
they just are not able to get them off. That is a possibility. There's a neutral side that maybe it's not
actually that big a deal to the cattle. So it's kind of like when a fly's
buzzing in my face and after awhile, I just let it pester me
cuz it won't go away. This suggests that maybe the oxpeckers
affect on the cattle was fairly small, even though they're getting
potentially nutrients themselves. There's the mutual advantage side
that somehow they're strengthening the cattle's immunity [COUGH] possibly by
increasing antibodies to fight antigens. That would definitely be
an adaptationist's explanation. And there were some crazy out there
explanations people suggested, like maybe they like the company, or
the oxpeckers generate mini force fields. That's probably not it. [COUGH] When we look at the research
results for why this was the case, so looking at the research results for
why the hosts tolerate these, it turns out in fact that some of these hosts try to
get them off, but are unable to do so. Just like that one student had
suggested the previous slide. That, in the case of rhinos
they tried quite hard, but were only able to get them off half
the time when they were at wounds. So this figure down here shows attempts
to remove the oxpecker from at wounds. So successful versus unsuccessful, so only about half of them were successful
at getting them off the wounds. In contrast, when they are on the ears,
they are able to flick them off fairly easily, or other places on their body
they're able to flick them off easily. So it is not a mutualistic thing
as was previously assumed, even though that was
the adaptationist's explanation. So let's look at applying optimality
theory to studying adaptive feeding behavior. But let's try to be careful not
to be overly adaptationist. So what considerations
go into optimal feeding? Well if you want to feed, and again you wanna do it as efficiently as
possible, what you wanna do is you want to maximize energy while minimizing
consumption of energy and time. So high energy per low
unit of time is the best. So on the plus side, you're getting
calories from food, that's your energy. On the minus side, you're expending
energy to get the food, so energy may be involved in searching,
handling, eating or digesting. And on the minus, there's also
time involved in getting food, which also involves, of course,
burning more energy. But there's time involved in searching,
handling, and digesting. So if we were to put together
a very simple formula for optimal foraging,
we want to maximize this quantity. We want to maximize calories obtained from
food minus calories expended getting food, divided by time to get it. Again, we want the prey with the highest
caloric content, we want to spend the minimal energy and time getting this
prey, so this is the idea behind it. So let's look at this in
the context of whelk-eating crows, another set of birds
eating shelled animals. [LAUGH] In this case, these are crows in
British Columbia that pick up whelks on average about 4 centimeters
long rarely less than that. They fly up into the air with
these whelks and they drop them. They fly almost exactly 5 meters and then
drop them try to shatter the shell and get the snail meat outside. Now sometimes it takes
a couple of flights to do it. Is this adaptive? There's a couple of different
things these could do. They could pick different sized whelks,
they could fly different heights, they could fly more times. So let's look and
see how this might be adaptive. So break it up into parameters. First, let's look at the height of drop. Obviously, it takes energy to fly high, so you wanna minimize the energy
you're taking for flying. But you want a high probability
the shell will break. You don't wanna have to fly 40 times. You wanna fly like once or
twice and be able to break it. So people looked this in the context of
the underlying physics, and it turns out, in fact, 5 meters height is optimal for
that sized shell to shatter. So you can look here on the x-axis,
the height in meters. So this is from 0 to 15 meters in the air. On the y-axis is number of drops
required to break the whelk shell. And we note when you're at 5 meters, you're pretty much at a level point there
where it doesn't seem like if you go much higher you have a much higher
probability of breaking the whelk shell. So that's at a very optimal point. There's very little increase
in probability in shell breaking if you go any higher. So that does seem to be adaptive. What about the size of whelk? Couldn't they have picked
maybe a smaller whelk? Why didn't they pick the smaller whelk? Well they experimentally
tried three sizes. In this case, the one they
picked is referred to as large. These are the 4 centimeter whelks. And they found that the bird
would need to fly higher and/or drop more times to break
the smaller shell. So again, on the x-axis here we
show the height of the drop, on the y-axis we show the number
of drops needed per whelk. For the large one, again,
this is what they ended up choosing. If they chose a smaller whelk,
a medium-sized one, they would have to drop it twice that many times, and even
more if they chose a very small whelk. So again,
it seems like they did choose adaptive. Now a question a lot of people like to ask
is, do we see optimal feeding in humans? Well there is the case of spices. And spices have been suggested as a place
where humans may actually choose some sort of optimal. Now the caloric content in
them is typically very low, so why do we like spicy food,
why do you like garlic? Maybe you don't like garlic. One possibility is it's just random or
some correlated response to smell or taste that's unrelated to
the actual garlic itself. Other possibility is there's
an antimicrobial property associated with some of the spices we use. In fact, many spices are known to have
very strong antimicrobial properties. Cinnamon, cloves, and mustard have
strong antimicrobial effectiveness. Some of the others have medium
antimicrobial effectiveness, like allspice, cumin, oregano, etc. And some inhibit very specific things. Like garlic, for example, as I mentioned inhibits salmonella,
E.coli, staph, bacillus. Cloves inhibit Aspergillus,
things like that. So let me ask you to generate
a prediction in video quiz here. [COUGH] If spices are used because they're
antimicrobial, and given what you might guess about what countries have
particular environments that are warm or moist, and thus more likely
to have a lot of microbes. If you surveyed the following countries,
India, Hungary, and Norway, which would you expect to
use the most spices in their cuisine, specifically the most spices
with antimicrobial properties? Well that was a pretty easy question,
I think. The expectation is that more
antimicrobials are needed in environments that will favor
the growth of microbes. So places where its warm and
moist will favor the growth of microbes. So if we look at these three countries,
India, Hungary, and Norway, it's a no-brainer that the wettest
place and the hottest place is India. So this is a place where more
antimicrobials will be needed, Hungary is kind of intermediate, and
Norway really is not particularly wet. Well, it's somewhat wet but
very much not hot overall. If we look at the spices used, what we
see here is, this is a list of spices on the x-axis, on y-axis, percent of
recipes that have any of those spices. Tons of spices are used in India, somewhat
in Hungary, and not so much in Norway. Way more spices are used in India than the
other two, and importantly with the red arrows, I designated the use of garlic and
onions in particular. Remember I mentioned that garlic had
very specific antimicrobial properties. Let me show you the antimicrobial
effectiveness of a suite of spices. Here are garlic and onions. They show almost complete inhibition
of bacteria, so these are very, very effective antimicrobials. In contrast, something like celery seed
is not particularly effective at all. So you see here garlic and onion are
almost completely effective, allspice and oregano also very highly effective, thyme, etc., starting to show slightly weaker
inhibition to bacterial growth. So that's pretty cool. Now, in this case,
we didn't really consider alternatives. So what are some of the alternative
explanations that should be considered? One is that there actually
are micronutrients being provided by these spices. It's a possibility. I know that spices are used to
disguise the smell of spoiled food. And last is maybe they're
just used where they grow. That maybe all these things grow in India. They don't grow in Norway or
Hungary so much. Well these have been investigated. Now in terms of the micronutrients that
doesn't really explain the correlation with temperature, why is that people in
this particular temperature need these micronutrients more than others. In terms of disguising the smell of
spoiled food, that actually doesn't make sense evolutionarily because it's not to
your advantage to consume spoiled food. If anything,
it could be to your disadvantage. And in terms of being used where they
grow, there is actually a very weak correlation between where they grow and
where they're used. But that doesn't really
explain the overall pattern. For example, pepper is one of the most
widely used and it grows in a very, very small fraction of the places so
it doesn't seem like that's explainable. Now, just extrapolating from this
into the importance of communication. Communication is critical for the context
of finding food for a lot of species. Not just for making food available to us. A classic case for
this is that of honeybee dances. This was elegantly described by
Nobel laureate Karl von Frisch. He showed that scout bees, actually,
will come back to the hive and can actually give hive
mates detailed information about the location of food by away
of how they do their little dances. Now, I won't try to explain this dance to
you, but I'll refer you to a YouTube link. This is also available online. But you should definitely watch this. It's very cool,
this means of communicating where food is. So we've been looking at this all in the
context of a adaptive feeding behavior but as you seen with the examples I'm talking
about here in the context of bees communication, sometimes
is very important as well We'll come back to that in the next video Thank you