Hello, and welcome back to
Introduction to Genetics in Evolution. So far we've studied the inheritance
of very simple genetic traits. Traits whose variation is caused by
maybe two alleles at a single locus. And we've looked at how
to map that genetic grid. What I'd like to do now is get into
some slightly more complicated path. Let's look at how traits really are. Most traits are not, most variation in
most traits is not usually caused by a variation at a single
gene with two alleles. So we'll first talk about mutations
as the source of genetic mutation. And then we'll go into what the genetic
basis is of normal traits and what are some complications rather than
the overly simple model we used so far. So, let's get started. You go back somewhere between three and
a half and four billion years ago, we had what we
believed to be the first origin of life. And we don't know exactly
what that life looked like or exactly the conditions were, but we can
imagine that maybe there was something along the lines of single haploid genome. I say haploid, I mean having one copy of
the genome, in a single primitive cell. Now genome there is
probably an exaggeration. It probably wasn't anything
nearly as complicated as most of the genomes you see today. But it would have been some small piece. Now the question I'd like to pose to you
is what would you, what would have to be true for you to define this thing as
alive, this original cell as alive. How would you decide it was
alive rather than inanimate? Well the most likely answer people would
say is it replicates, it reproduces. That it makes another copy of itself so
this one makes these two other daughters, and what it makes will
be dictated by its gene. Now let's imagine hypothetically that
the genetic code that was found in that original cell never, ever changed over the
three and a half billion years of time. What would life look
like on the planet today? The answer is if it never changed,
and if its genetic code is dictating what it can make,
basically life would look like this today. There'd be a lot of copies of that simple, haploid genome inside cells
all around the planet. That's obviously not what we see today. So there obviously has been
introduction of some sort of new variation into the diversity
we see on the planet today. Now where does this variation come from? Well this is the theme for
today's lecture. Where does this variation come from? What is the source of these
changes in the genetic code? Well, the answer is mutations. Mutations are often defined in
textbooks as a changed DNA sequence. But very importantly, I'd like to
emphasize they are the ultimate source of all genetic variation on the planet. Because again, if we have a single origin
of life, which we do assume, single origin of life, common ancestry of all existing
life, then all the diversity we see has to come from iterations of mutation from
that original self-replicating form, okay. So, what is a mutation or
what is a mutant? I mean you hear this word often,
both in common parlance and in the movies, things like that. Well, a mutant may be what you call your
brother when he's being very annoying. Get off me you mutant! I heard that many times. Those of you who are fans of science
fiction, a mutant in the comic world is an individual who possesses a genetic
trait called an X-gene that allows them to naturally develop
superhuman powers and abilities. So this is, there's a picture
here form the comic X-Men. You may have seen the movies from that. Probably not the definition we'll be
using here in this class, as you'd guess. You make think of a mutant as someone who has an extreme
disfiguration such as extra fingers. So, this individual right
here has polydactyly. So if you count,
they actually have six fingers. This actually something that does come up. This is a mutation that
does crop up periodically. It's a little harsh to refer to the person
as a mutant because they have this. It is a mutation which arises. Now honestly, there's a little bit
of truth to all those definitions. Though less so for
obviously the X-Men version. [LAUGH] But again, the ultimate
source of all variation is mutation. It is any sort of change
in the genetic code, okay. So you can think of it this way, that
mutations happen and they happen a lot. They happen far more
frequently than you may guess, and you'll see in a subsequent video,
we'll talk about mutation rates. Now one of the most common types that
we'll focus on for this, is an error replication or a meiosis that leads to
a change in a base or a nucleotide. So imagine you have this stretch
of sequence in a mom, okay? And let's say the mom is
homozygous with this. So she has two copies of this stretch
of sequence that starts with ATG. Now let's say, in one of her eggs that
makes the kid, there was this base change, going from A to G. So this is actually what's in the kid. The kid then has a mutation. He or she has a nucleotide variant that
was not found in either of the parents. So that is by definition a mutation. Now importantly,
let me emphasize what a mutation is not. So mutations do not happen
when you need them, right? They don't happen preferentially
when you need them. You can imagine something like, oh it'd
really be great to have six fingers. [SOUND] No, no, no. That doesn't happen at all. They are random with respect to need,
okay? Now many mutations are bad. In fact, probably, you could argue
that most mutations even are bad. Or at the very least, a large fraction. Why is that the case? If you think about it,
our genetic code is not completely, but largely fairly streamlined. So if you introduce a random change,
it's likely to be something that's bad. It could be something,
but doesn't really matter. But it's likely to be
something that's bad. The analogy I often like to use is
imagine that you have a car, right. And this car has come together
over a very long period of time. And you take a hammer from way across
the room and throw it towards the car. What are the odds, that hammer will
make the car better in some way? Probably not zero, but it's extremely low. In contrast, what are the odds
the hammer will either do nothing, or nothing substantive, or
it will actually be bad for the car? Probably pretty high. So, on average, we tend to assume that most mutations
are either bad, or they don't matter. I used one example here of
one that doesn't matter. Maybe you're familiar here
with the triplet code. So again, genes tend to code for protein. They have a triplet code
associated with it. And very often, that third base in the code does not
change which protein's produced. So, if you have as part of this code,
AAA versus AAG, you would actually put the same
amino acid into that protein. There would actually be no
change in the final protein. So again, most mutations tend to fall
into one of these two categories, either the bad or the don't matter. Now rarely, but it does happen,
a mutation may be good, advantageous. Now again, it doesn't arise when you need
it, but it may just happen to be good. And it may not necessarily even be
good at the time when it first arises. But it might end up being something that
is useful in a subsequent generation. So thinking about that, let's imagine
that a mutation has happened, and then you vary it down so
it exists in the population. So here's our first generation. Everybody has the same sequence, okay? And we have this one mutation like
the one we talked about previously which has arisen in one egg cell. Now as you'll notice, we now have the birth of a SNP,
a single nucleotide polymorphism. Because here all the sequences
were exactly the same. But here we have one site
which is polymorphic. It has two different variants there. Now let me ask you a question. Is it more important that this
transmitted meiotically or mitotically? Remember we talked about meiosis and
mitosis way back an the beginning. Well the answer is definitely
meiotic because let's say for example, this new mutation starts
in this part of your hand, it spreads to the rest of your hand, it
never gonna get passed down to offspring. It's much more important that it
gets transmitted meiotically so that it gets onto further generations and
gets into generation two. So what happens then? What happens then is this
new variant may be lethal, it may cause immediate
death of the embryo. That's a possibility and
in the previous slide, I show you one individual
was heterozygous for it. Maybe that individual
will tie at the age of. A couple of months in utero. It could cause some other
sort of loss of fitness. It could be, you notice it doesn't
immediately die, but they have extreme, gastrointestinal distress that makes it so
they're not able to thrive as well. It's a possibility. These are definitely in the bad category,
right? Now it could be that this mutation
cause no change in fitness. That this mutation is just the same as the parent in terms of overall
probability of passing on the genes. So this will be what's referred
to as the neutral category. And finally,
maybe it causes super fertility. Maybe it makes it that this person
is extremely attractive, or that when they do mate with an individual,
they're much more likely to fertilize. This would definitely be a good category. This would much more be like
X-men version category. So, let's follow what happens after that. So again,
we left off last time with generation two. Here's this new mutation. Well It may spread, it may get lost. It's possible that this individual
would leave no offspring. Let's imagine this, the case when I said
this individual died at a very young age. Or could just die for a random reason. Maybe this individual gets hit
by a car at the age of ten. It could happen that this
just never gets transmitted. That's one possibility. But, let's assume it does get transmitted. Well then some individuals will get it. This individual gets it here, this
individual gets it here, and in this case we even start getting some homozygotes
because this individual gets it and passes it on and has a kid with this one. So, again we have an individual
here who's homozygous. We have a few others. This one seems to be spreading
in this particular case. So it looks like maybe this particular
mutation was advantageous or possibly neutral, but
certainly not very bad. So this is a kind of thing that
can happen with new mutations. We have this new variation. It arises. It may just get immediately
lost because it's bad. It may get immediately
lost if it's neutral. It may even get immediately
lost if it's good. Let's say for example,
this individual had super fertility. But again, got hit by a car. That could happen. But, for a lot of mutations, they will
arise, you have the birth of a new snip. They'll be there in population for
some time. Now, over time many rounds of this
mutation, not just that individual one which generate a lot of
variation in natural population. Again, as I emphasize, a lot of mutations don't necessarily have
an effect on fertility or life span. But they may still effect a phenotype. They may still effect how
an organism look, right? Let's say for example there's a mutation
that's slightly lengthened your earlobe. Maybe that wouldn't effect your
probability of having kids whatsoever passing on your genes. But, it still could get passed on,
and in that sense, it is still neutral,
even though it has an effect. Now, I'm gonna come back to
this example in the next video. But I just want to introduce it. There's lots of genetic variation in
things like, for example, human height. Now some of that of course, has to do
with nutrition rather than genetics. But where does that variation come from? Is that actually all just
from mutations at one gene? Well, take a look at the next video and
see what you think. Thank you for joining.