Hello, and welcome back to introduction
to genetics and evolution. In most of the videos that you've seen so
far, we were studying patterns of genetic inheritance looking at
alleles from one gene at a time. In the last video you saw,
we studied patterns of genetic inheritance looking at two genes at a time,
rather than one. We're focusing on genes that
are on different chromosomes, and we discussed how those
assort independently. They follow Mendel's Law
of Independent Assortment. In this video we'll continue to
look at patterns of inheritance, of two genes at a time. But looking at genes that may actually
happen to be on the same chromosome, but maybe not right next to each other. Now this is called crossing over and this is a subset of the overall
process of recombination. Many of you use Wikipedia, I know, recombination, you can basically
break up the word as I've done here. Re or a new. Combination. So basically recombination is shuffling
of alleles into new combinations. Combinations that were
not found in the parent. I will emphasize the Wikipedia definition
in this regard is not precise. Wikipedia definition focuses specifically
on one type of recombination called crossing over which
will be our primary focus. But I want to emphasize that
all recombination is important. Both through genetics and evolution. And independent assortment is
one type of recombination. Essentially you have recombination
when you produce a gamete that has a combination of alleles that
was not found in one of the parents. This gamete is then called recombinant. So you have to examine this by looking at,
essentially two stages. You have to look at a person. The sort of focal person. You have to look at the gametes
that made this person. You know, the things from their mom and
their dad. And we have to look at what
happens in their gamete. So, let me illustrate
this with an example. Let's say that you're looking at
something on the X chromosome, which is one chromosome. And let's say you're looking at
the two traits that I talked about in the last video. Being colorblind vs not colorblind. And let's say that you're also looking at
a trait that's controlled by one gene. Something similar to
the way I described before, with your left thumb landing on top. As opposed to the right thumb on top. Or the one with the left style
landing on top is dominant. So if you have a sperm from somebody
who was not colorblind, and with left thumb on top, so
this is the sperm that's coming in. Here's the egg,
the X that's colorblind, and right thumb on top, we end up with
somebody who's heterozygous for both. He has one copy of each alleles. Now in this case, this individual,
who is a female, is gonna have an egg. Note now this egg will through this
process of independent assortment, is just as likely to
give this x as that x. In this particular case, this x is
the one that lands in the egg, and this other chromosome that has the left
thumb on top is also lands in the egg. Note this combination
is found in this egg. The Xcb and the L. The Xcb actually came from the mom,
from this individual's mom. The L came from this individual, dad. So, we actually have a new combination. This is a combination that was not one
of the forms that made the person. This was not something found
in parental sperm or egg. When it is a new combination. That is why this is called recombinant,
right? Because we do not see anybody
up here who's Xcb and capital L. So what's the opposite of a recombinant. The opposite of a recombinant is
a parental type or nonrecombinant. So the first part of this figure is
exactly the same as the previous one I showed you. But in this case. What happened is this ended up in
the egg and this ended up in the egg. Now, these two are the exact combination
that's founded one of the parents. So, this would be considered a parental or
non-recombinant gametes. See what I mean? So, basically what you're looking at
gametes that made the individual and gametes that are coming out of
the individual and you're looking to see is there a new combination of gametes
coming out of the individual. If there is,
then you've had recombination. There's two means of recombination. One of them is independent assortment,
which we've talked about. And this is typically what happens when
you have different chromosomes, right, that you're just as likely to pass on one copy of the chromosome as another copy
of the chromosome based on Mendel's laws. Now, the other possibility
is crossing over. Now, again, sometimes the word
recombination is synonymized to this. Sometimes people, when they say recombination are referring
specifically to a crossing over. In this case, you're actually breaking
off a piece of one chromosome and sticking it to another. This right here is a picture from
Thomas Hunt Morgan's book from about 1960, where there's a white chromosome and
a black chromosome. Pretend that one came from the dad and
one came from the mom and we see in the offspring, we may get
this part black part white chromosome. So it's this again new combination but it's actually happening along the length
of one particular chromosome. So let me recap what these two things are. First in terms of independent assortment. Importantly, we can study
independent assortment by multiplying probability, right? Because we assume that traits
are inherited independently. So, again, if you're just as likely to
pass on this alleles as that alleles, we can then just multiply
the probabilities to get what's gonna happen
among all the offspring. So in this example here, this is one of
the one's we did in a previous video, you're heterozygous for both t and s. This is what would happen in terms of t's,
this is what would happen in terms of s's. If you're big T little t
crossed with big T little t, 1/4 of your kids would be big T big T. One half will be big T, little T. One quarter will be little T, little T. Same thing is happening with S's. So then to see what would happen for
the combinations, we just multiply the two things together. So the probability of being big T,
big T, big S, big S will be 1/4 times 1/4 or 1/16. That's what this is right here. All of these are divided by 16. So one will be this. The probability of being ttSS. So again, it'd be 1/16, that right there. The probability of being TtSs,
that's one half times one half, so it'd be a quarter or four sixteenths,
so we see right there. So, this assumes true independence. Now independence works well with
this independent assortment thing. And you can see how this happens
by looking at the chromosomes. Imagine here, let's see,
all the blues came from dad and all the reds came from mom. This is now in the individual,
this is chromosomes 1, 2, 3, and 4. Okay? You have you meiotic divisions and
they produce this set of gametes. You can see along here,
you may pass on the red chromosome 1. You may pass on the blue chromosome 3. You may pass on the red chromosome 4, etc. All sorts of different
combinations happen. But in reality when you're looking
at genes along the chromosome, it's not that simple. Often homologous chromosomes, these
chromosomes that basically either came from dad and came from mom, will trade
pieces during this process of miosis, that was what was depicted
in that diagram from Morgan. So this happens when they're doubled and
this process is called crossing over and this again forms recombinant
chromosomes or recombinant gametes. Where if you're looking at two
genes you can get combinations not found in the parents
among the alleles. So let me just walk through
this a little bit more slowly. So you have two homologous chromosomes. One inherited from the egg,
one inherited from the sperm. So here it is. Here's your egg chromosome,
here's your sperm chromosome. See them both.
So here they are. They're put together. So what happens then,
in the individual, so let's say for example this is me and the red I got
from my mom, the blue I got from my dad. What may happen inside me in the process
of making some of my gametes, I may have something like this happen,
where pieces get broken and stuck together such that among my eggs, I obviously don't produce eggs, but among
my eggs I might have some nonrecombinant. So this is passing along
exactly what I got from mom, and some that are recombinant,
bits from mom, bits from dad. Bits from mom, bits from dad. This is a recombination event
happening along a chromosome. So you may be wondering, how do we
tell if recombination is happening? How can we tell that this is going on? Well what happens is,
we look at genetic markers, and we'll talk about what genetic markers are. But you can think of them as
sort of the big A, little a and big B little b that we've
talked about in the past. You can think of in like the traits that
are associated with which thumb's on top or being colorblind or not. In this case, let's say for example, we know that from your mom,
you got the capital A and capital B. We know from your dad you got
the little a and little b, right? The nonrecombinant eggs from this
individual will be capital A, capital B and little a, little b. It's something that was identical
to the sperm or egg that made you. Recombinant eggs would be those new
combinations little a, big B and big A, little b. Now importantly,
you won't always have recombination. In fact, let's say for example, the a and
b genes were right next to each other. They are basically stuck together. At that point you refer to
them as being totally linked. They are linked together. That if you get the big A,
you're always going to get the big B. When you get the little A,
you'll always get the little b. If that was true, then you would
only get these nonrecombinant eggs. Right. Basically if these two
things were glued together. And you will only get nonrecombinant eggs. What tends to happen is
neighboring gene variants, or alleles, tend to stay associated. So, I diagramed here what you might
imagine looking at several chromosomes from one heterozygote individual. So, again, here's the chromosome
from mom on top, it's red. Bottom chromosome is from dad,
it's blue on the bottom. Their producing gametes. You might see this along
the gametes there. So you have a stretch of reds, stretch of
blues, stretch of blues, stretch of blues, stretch of red, etcetera etcetera. If you look at this,
how often are A and B linked? How often do you inherit a red A with
a red B, or a blue A with a blue B? A and B are right next to each other. And if you look across this whole chart,
pretty much always. And if you get a red A,
you're always getting a red B. If you're getting a blue A,
you're always getting a blue B. You see that very clearly along here. In contrast, how often are A and C linked? Notice, A and C are further apart. Well, here, in this first individual,
A and C are both red. On the second,
we actually get a red with a blue. Or we go blue with the red. Course we go blue with the blue. So, really only about half the time
are you getting the two parental types and half of the time you're
getting the recumbent. Now this is what's used for
constructing genetic maps. That if you have genes close together
they tend to be inherited together. You're violating this principle
of independent assortment, I would describe before though what's
happening in this case is your looking along one chromosome rather than
looking at different chromosomes but you can no longer multiply
the probabilities like we did before. Let's try to follow this,now
let's assume total linkage. Let's assume that a and
b are stuck together. They're right next to each other. So let's imagine dad is big A, big B. And let's imagine mom is big A,
little a, big B, little b. So dad is always giving the same gametes,
no matter what. Dad is always giving a big A,
big B, right? So, we see that along this chromosome. Dad is always giving a big A, big B. Mom in this case will only give a big A,
little b, right? Or a little a big B. As we said it's linked right? So this is what moms going to give. So what kind of offspring can we see. We can have big A big A, big B little b. Same over here. Or we can have big A,
little a, big B, big B. So in this case there's only two possible
forms that you can get out of this. There's only two possible offsprings, if you have total linkage in this case,
right? What would happen if in contrast,
there was no linkage? What would happen then? Well again,
dad is always going to be giving big A, big B, right,
that is all he can ever give. Even if he did have recombination then
you'd never know because it'd always still be big A, big B. But in this case,
mom has more things she can give. Here we have the parental types. Big A, little B and little A, big B. But if there is no linkage, sometimes
little A, little B can go together, or big A, big B can go together. So these are recumbents and
these are parentals and as a result there's a lot more possible
options that you can get up so we can get in this case big A, big A,
big B ,little B, big A ,little A, big B, big B, big A, big B, big B, and
big A ,little A, big B, little B so in this case now we have four possible
types of offspring rather then just two. Now, one thing I hope you noticed
in looking at this is that phase was important, that basically,
which alleles is next to the other one. In this case, let's say, for example, you were to say an individual is
big A,little a,big B,and little b. We don't actually know the phase. You don't know what combination of
alleles he got from a sperm that made him as opposed to the egg that made him. In this top example the egg
that made him was big A, big B and the sperm that made him was
little a,little b, well that's one possibility the other possibility is that
egg that made him was big A, little b, and the sperm that made him was little a,
big B. In each of these cases you get
different sorts of recombinant gametes. This these bottom ones,look
at the bottom set. The capital letter ones
are recombinant gametes here, right? Because you have to have
a recombination of it to get those. For the top one, one capital with one
lower case is what's recombinant. So it's very important that just
because you see an individual that's big A ,little a, big B, little b ,you
can't actually just from that alone. Figure out what sort of
recombination is going on. So we'll pick up on this in
the next video to look at how to calculate recombination distances. [INAUDIBLE] Thank you very much.