Hello, and welcome back to introduction
to genetics and evolution. In this set of videos we'll be
talking about evolutionary trees, and the field of phylogenetics, the study
of relationships among organisms. In this first video, we'll look at
how you read evolutionary trees, and how you understand
the information within them. And then in subsequent videos, we'll look
at how you generate evolutionary trees and some uses of having them. So let's go ahead and get started. This tree of life analogy is one that
many of you are probably familiar with. And we commonly conceive
the relationships among organisms in the context
of this tree of life. Now,this is a useful visualization for
evolutionary history. And this can be done within a species
among different individuals, almost like a family tree. Or it can be done among
close related species, or it could be done among all species. You see this dates back to
Darwin's Origin of Species book. This was actually the only
image in Darwin's book, and it shows this tree of life. Now, there's a couple of
different meanings for trees. And, here are two related
meaning of trees. One is you can look at trees in the
context of groupings of similarities or classification. Or you can think of them in
the context of ancestry relationships. Now, let's do these two separately first
and then we will bring them together. So, looking at the figure on the left
here, we have a whole set of vehicles. Now which of these vehicles is
most similar to each other? Well we have the two Honda cars,
very similar to each other. They are motor vehicles just like
this Toyota truck over here. But they're clearly not the same category. You'd say they're a little bit
less similar to the truck, than they are to each other. And they're very dissimilar to
these pedal vehicles way over here. So the tricycle and the bicycle,
which are very similar to each other. So, this would be a categorization
just in terms of similarity. That these two are very similar,
these two are very similar, this is kind of similar to the others. And they're all in this
general group of vehicles. Well, that's just in
the context of classification. Another way of looking at trees is in
the context of ancestry relationships. I've depicted this here with
a piece of the royal family. We have Queen Elizabeth II
here on the bottom, and we have several of her grandchildren. So we have Prince William and
Prince Harry, who are brothers. We have Princess Eugenie and
Beatrice who are sisters. And we have Zara who is their cousin. So, if you look, these two are sisters. They are very similar to each other,
in appearance and in relationship. These two are brothers and are very
similar to each other in appearance and relationship. And all of them are somewhat similar, they're more similar than someone
just at random on the planet. Because they share this common
ancestor of Queen Elizabeth. Now we can take this further to
take a look at classification groups in the context of
evolutionary relationships. Many of you are familiar with some of
these basic classification groups, so let's focus on these animals
here on the far right. Now these are all animals,
there are not plants here. So they have one thing in common. They are all animals. Okay?
The top five, here as you can see. The top five here all have a backbone, so
they are all referred to as vertebrates. So I have that classified over here,
their are all vertebrates, in contrast the fruit fly
there is an arthropod. The top four here Are all mammals. They all give milk to their offspring. So they have something in common and they're more in common with
each other than with the rest. The top three are purely carnivorous. They only eat meat. So that's something they
all have in common. And the top two both are canines. They are both in the group that has dogs,
for example. And then ultimately they are different. The wolf and
fox are different from each other. So you see we have these
classification groups. And this hierarchical
classification system that we use today was begun by
Linnaeus way back in the 1700s. Now he didn't talk about this in
the context of relationships, but instead he used it as a way of categorizing
the diversity we see in nature. And you see it goes from the most general
down to the most specific, right? You see the different groups
have different things in common. And we see this in this
diagram that I made here. That carnivores have more in common with
each other than they do with primates, like us. Mammals have more in common with
each other than they do with birds. Vertebrates have more in common with each
other than they do with arthropods, etc. So these classification groups actually
imply evolutionary relationships. This was one of Darwin's insights, that if we were to draw a tree of
life it may be along these lines. Where the fox and
wolf have a very recent common ancestor. Further back, see the ancestor they had,
the common ancestor with cats. Further still back,
you see a common ancestor with humans. Further still a herring gull, and further
still the vinegar fly or fruit fly. Now this sounds fairly straightforward. In practice, however,
you can get conflicting results. Depending on which
characteristics you use for making this sort of classification system. So one of the examples that I
used before was vertebrates. So vertebrates are animals
that have a backbone. If you were to categorize
the animals here that you see, which ones have a backbone and
which ones don't? Well, the guinea pig obviously has
a backbone and the wood duck has backbone. Whereas the lady bug and
the spider do not. So this is very clear that these two
are similar and these two are different. In contrast what if you use a different
character what if you were to use wings? Well here the ladybug and
the wood duck have wings. The guinea pig and the spider do not. That is clearly not the classification
that you would imagine off the top of your head. So you can get conflicting results. Well how do you resolve these
conflicting results when you use different characteristics for
making these groups? Well in part you use the weight of
evidence, that presumably you're not going to just categorize things
just by having wings or not. Or just by having a backbone or not. But there will be a number
of characteristics and you look at how many of them favor one
set of relationships versus the other. And you also will look at what I
refer to new versus old characters. Now, I'm not gonna talk about
that in this video, but I just wanted to toss that in there. Because sometimes when I first start
talking about these relationships, people get caught up in that, and
they say, but but but, what about this! So I just wanna put that down. And we'll talk about how
you generate trees later. So what are some of the assumptions
in making phylogenetic trees? One is we're looking at the summation
of relationships over time. I love this figure. This comes from a paper by David Balm
who's a friend of mine as well. So here we have four butterflies. You could add the parents there, and you see that there's some
relationships among them. That this one has these two parents,
this one has these two parents, etc. You can add earlier generations,
you get this web of relationships. You can then look at the whole population;
you see that this web gets more scattered. You can look at the whole species, and ultimately you get to
this evolutionary tree. So what we're looking at is
the sum of relationships. Think of it as the family tree of
every organism that is ever lived. It is possible to generate
that family tree. But it's going to be very,
very, very dense. There's going to be a lot
of different relationships. It's going to take a long, long time
to go back to this evolutionary tree. And that's essentially what is
reflected in the evolutionary tree. This summation of relationships over time. It is reflecting the evolutionary history. Most importantly just history. We are assuming common ancestry of all
the species that are being studied are generating the phylogenetic tree. That is an assumption that
we're putting into there. We're assuming there are clean
splits into two or more taxa. In other words the tree bifurcates,
it splits. It doesn't have to be just two it could
actually split in three ways all at once. But we're assuming these
sorts of splits over time. We're assuming the formation
of new lineages. We're also assuming that
once species do diverge, they don't actually come back together. OKay. So here's a sample evolutionary
tree that I'd like you to look at, as well as some terms that
I'd like you to know. So, first just look at the tree itself. And, this is a tree that you've seen
before, so we have the wolf and the fox, which are canines, or sort of in
the dog family I guess you'd say. We have our cat, wolf and
fox which are all carnivores. And, we have our human, cat,
wolf and fox which are all mammals. So what are the branches of this tree? Well, the branches of
this tree are basically these lines coming out from a point. These are all branches, just like if
you're looking at a actual plant tree. So these are all branches
along the evolutionary tree. The nodes. Nodes are intersecting points of branches. So right here we have an intersection
between the branch going to cat the branch going to the canines. Here we have a node that intersects
the branch going to wolves. Oh I'm sorry the branch going to foxes and
the branch going to wolves. And of course we have a node back here. So what do these nodes represent? Well let's think about this for a second. The nodes represent the branching point where you have a lineage that goes
on to evolve into the modern fox, and a branch that goes on to
evolve into the modern wolf. So this is the point where foxes and wolves share their most
recent common ancestor. So back here, those entities that eventually would have offspring that go on
to become foxes and wolves were the same. They had a single ancestor at the node and
anytime before that node. Same over here, at this point
in time the evolutionary tree. Some individuals may have descendants
that go on to be cats, and some descendants that go
on to be wolves or foxes. The root of the tree is the base. It's way down here and below that. So, that is basically the point of
a most recent common ancestor for every individual that you're looking
at in the evolutionary tree. Now there are such things
as unrooted trees and I'm not gonna go into those in this class
but you may see them in other contexts. So, you've looked at this tree and you see
that there's these nice diagonal lines. You see the points where
we have the nodes, these most recent common ancestors
of particular sub groups. Now I want to emphasize that these
diagonal lines are not necessary. There's other ways of
representing evolutionary trees. And you see this is exactly the same
representation as before except now the nodes are represented
by a horizontal line. It's exactly the same as before. We still have the most recent common
ancestor of humans with cats, dogs and wolves. About a hundred million years ago. And a more recent one for cats with dogs and wolves, and a more
recent still one for Foxes and wolves. So again,
there's different ways of representing it. Now we assess the relationships among
individuals in this evolutionary tree, by looking at who shares
the most recent common ancestor. So even if you didn't know that foxes and
wolves were canines, you could tell they're more closely related to each other
than to any other individual on this tree. Because when you look at it they share
a fairly recent common ancestor. In contrast, cats with foxes share a more
distant common ancestor over here. So the most recent common ancestor
of cat with fox would be right here, which is further back in evolutionary time
than the most recent common ancestor of fox with wolf. Now I want to stress, cuz there's something that
people mess up all the time. Don't worry about who
is next to who on top. Look at the most recent common ancestor. Common mistake is for people to think for
example that, oh look, the fox is more closely related to
the cat than the wolf is to the cat. Because look, the fox is next the the cat. But no, where is the most recent
common ancestor of fox and cat. Most recent common ancestor fox and
cat is here. If you go back in time, where do
you get the ancestor that's shared? Right there. What about for wolf and cat? Same thing. That's the more recent common ancestor. So I'm gonna ask you a question. I'm gonna get you to look
at a couple of trees. I want you to tell me if these
trees are exactly the same. Or if they are different in terms
of evolutionary relationships. Obviously, they look different. That's irrelevant. Are they the same or are they different in
the context of evolutionary relationships. You may want to pause the video,
cuz this is going to be an in video quiz. So I suggest you pause, and
then think about it, and then play again when you're ready. Well, I hope that wasn't too difficult. So when you look at this, what is the most
recent common ancestor of fox and wolf? Well, it's right there in this tree and
it's right there in this tree. What is the most recent common ancestor
of cat with either of the two canines? Right there and right there. And with humans, with all of them. Right here and right here. These are basically exactly the same tree. I mean if you look at
the common ancestors, it's not like all the sudden foxes
more closer related to human. Or foxes more closer related to
cat in one tree than the other. The point at which you have
the most recent common ancestor is exactly the same. That is important when comparing trees. Let me give you an example
looking at just a family tree. Looking at this family tree,
you see exactly the same thing. That we have Prince Harry and
Prince William off to the left, we have these two in the middle,
and this person off to the side. If you rotate this tree,
this does not make William any more closely related
to Beatrice then he was over here. It doesn't change the relationships. All you did was just rotate
the depiction of the relationships. But when you look at where
the common ancestors are. The common ancestors or the nodes are in exactly the same
places here, as they are here. And the common ancestor is here for
all of them. So the relationships did not change. It's very important not to look at the to
see if the ends are nearest to each other. For example, these two are no
more closer related here or no more distant related here. Then here. It doesn't matter who's
next to each other. All that matters is where the most
recent common ancestor is. In that case,
the most recent common ancestor for those two people is
Queen Elizabeth in both cases. Let's look at this in a broader sense. Here's a whole set of
phylogenetic trees and all I've done in each of these
cases is rotate the nodes. All of these are exactly identical. Every single one of these
is exactly identical. Because again, the most recent common
ancestor for a fox and wolf is the same. The most recent common ancestor for
the cat with the others is the same. The most recent common ancestor for humans with the others is
the same in each of these. These are all exactly the same tree. I'm emphasizing this a lot because,
you know, I want you to see that it
doesn't matter the ends. This is something a lot of
students get confused in. But you see in each of these cases,
the canines group together, right? The carnivores all group together. And then the human is always
the most distantly related. So I'm gonna now a set. Here's a set of four phylogenetic trees. I want you to look at these, and you're
gonna pause the video again just a second. Because there's gonna be an in-video quiz. I want you to look at these and
tell me which of these is different. Well, I hope that wasn't too difficult. Let's work through it. So, B and D are clearly the most closely
related in all of these trees, okay? Now, what's the next most
closely related to B and D? Well, we look at the most
recent common ancestors, let's start with number three over here. Here's the most recent common
ancestor out from that. And that would group A with B and D there. A with B and D there. A with B and D here. Woops this is C with B and D. This is a different phylogenetic
tree from the other two. So looking at which of these trees is
different, A has a more recent common ancestor to B and D in trees two, three
and four, but not in tree number one. So, tree number one is
the one that's different. Let me give you another try. This is, I'll warn you ahead of time, you
may consider somewhat of a trick question, but I hope it helps you
understand the concept. Looking at this which species is or
are most closely related to species A? Pause the video think about it for
a second and take the quiz. So, this was a little bit tricky. Now, here's A and I'm asking which
species is most closely related to A. So, let's go to the common ancestor. There's the common ancestor of A, there's
a node between the branch leading to A and the next branch out. What you see is this branch
goes both to B and to D. There is no difference in average
relationship between A and D then between A and B. Because they share the same most recent
common ancestor as depicted right there. So I hope that was useful for you. Now let me just talk very briefly
about a couple of applications with evolutionary trees. We'll come back to another one in
the third video of this series. Now generally speaking, evolutionary trees
are of course used to classify nature and understand the process of evolution. You may want to know for example is a fox more closely
related to a wolf or to a dog? Well by making an evolutionary tree
you can find out which of those is more closely related. Now there are more specific applications
both in medicine and in law. The medicine many of you
are familiar with, the process for identifying flu strains for vaccine. That does involve file
a genetic reconstruction. So this is a direct application
evolution to health. That you want to see what is
the diversifying strain of flu, make sure that gets into the vaccine. In terms of law,
there's some interesting cases out there, where people have traced various
infections, such as with HIV, to a source. And here are two court cases
mentioned in this context. And in cases where people knowingly
infected others, you need to establish that others contracted the virus from
the accused, and not from elsewhere. And in doing that, evolutionary trees can
be used to show that the victim strain of a fast evolving virus,
is much more similar to the accused strain than to any of the others
in the population. And that can essentially prove,
at least with a statistical confidence. That the victim got the disease from
the accused, and not from somebody else. And then if you have data showing
that the accused knew that he or she was infected prior to that,
then clearly they are guilty of intentionally withholding that
information and passing on the disease. So that's one application of
phylogenetic trees to law, and again we talked about one for medicine. Well I hope you enjoyed this piece. In the next video we come back to how
we generate these evolutionary trees. Very exciting. Thank you so much.