Hello. Welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In the previous video, we talked about these principles of
selective sweeps and hitchhiking. What happens is, if you have a region
of low recombination in particular, when an advantageous variance
spreads through the population, it eliminates variation at nearby,
mutual sites. It reduces pi, which is our
measure of nucleotide variation. Now what I'd like to do in this video
is explore how we can see signatures of past natural selection in
the genome leveraging this. Now again, recombination can help
us detect natural selection. So we're going to use the principles
we talked about last video to actually identify areas that seem to have
experienced natural selection. Now, an important principle which
I haven't emphasized up until now, is that recombination rates are not
constant across the genome. There are areas where
recombination is very common, and we already discussed in this
context crossover hotspots. But there are often broad regions
which have many hotspots, and there are broad regions
that have almost no hotspots. So recombination is especially often
thought to be low near the centromeres. The centromere is the part
of the chromosome that holds together the chromatids. Let's imagine that here is a chromosome, that you have your
centromere here at one end. Let's say we are looking at different
stretches of a million base pairs. So this first stretch in
a million base pairs, let's say the recombination
rate is .1 centimorgan. So that's a very low recombination rate. We go a little bit further out and
this stretch of a million base pairs. The recombination rate is 3 centimorgans. Go a little bit further out in this
stretch of a million base pairs, the recombination rate
is five centimorgans. So an important principle
I want to stress for this is you can't directly translate
centimorgans to millions of bases or numbers of bases because there's
not a one to one transition here. There are areas where very low
centimorgans are associated with high numbers of bases. There is where a number of centimorgans
is much higher with the same number of bases, okay. The linear order stays
the same either way, but the recombination rate may change. And again as I mentioned, the recombination rate is often
lower near the centromere. And we measure recombination rate
as centimorgans per megabase. So let me show you an actual picture
of human recombination rates. This is looking across
chromosome three of humans. So you see here near the centromere
recombination rate is low but here on the X-axis is position
in millions of bases, on the Y-axis is the average
recombination rate. We see here near the end, recombination
is pretty high, goes down, up, down, up, down, etcetera, but
low again near the centromere. So it is very variable. Now, what we can do, is we can focus
at what's going to happen if you have an adaptive variance in say a region like
this where recombination rate is very low, versus if you have an adaptive variant in
a region like this where recombination rate is moderately high. So let's look at that. Again these new adaptive alleles can
arise by mutation every now and then. And sometimes they arise in a region
where recombination is low. So again, there's low centimorgans
per megabase, no hotspots. So in this case, now we have five variable
sites depicted here on this figure. They're in blue. I apologize if it's a little
bit hard to see on this slide. But I wanted to show you an actual
stretch of sequence there. So let's see what happens. Let's put this now in the case
where there's no recombination. So here's our new adaptive variant. This is this is beneficial G. If there's no recombination
what's gonna happen? Well at these stars indicate
the variable sites. So there's one, two, three, four,
five, different variable sites. Aside from the selected one. So these are ones we
are assuming that are neutral. That it does not matter for
fitness if you have a T or a G here or if you have a C or a T there. So as this G spreads you lose variation
at all other nucleotide sites. So now none of these are variable anymore. That's why I got rid of the stars. So you lost all variation
across this entire stretch. Pi across this whole sequence now, or across this whole stretch
is zero in this population. Let's try this again in a region
where recombination is very common, where you might have high
centimorgans per megabase. Here's that adaptive variant again. We still have five other variable
sites with neutral variation. Well as it spreads in this case, you see we've already in this case had
some recombination out near the ends. As it continues to spread, we've lost
variation very close to the selected site. Maybe there was no recombination
between these two. But on average since there's
a lot of recombination you retained variation out here. He retained it here, here, and here. So again, you maintain a high pi across
most of this sequence but you lost a tiny bit of pi because sequence is very close
to the spreading sight lost variation. So we can generate a prediction. Our prediction is if you survey regions
around the genome then you should be able to find some sort of association
between recombination rate and pi. So take this quiz question real quick. Do you think this
relationship will be absent, do you think there's
really no relationship? Do you think regions of high recombination
should generally have high pi. This would be a positive association. Or do you expect a negative relationship, the regions of high recombination
should have low pi. Well, that was an extremely easy one. Again, as I said, if you have high
recombination you're able to sustain variation, so we do expect this
to be a positive association. And in fact, that's exactly what you see. So this is looking at data from humans. On the x access here
is recombination rate. On the y access here is pi. This is from a study by
Hellman at al Genome Research. And again you see there is a general trend
that as recombination goes up, pi goes up. Each individual circle here is a stretch
of sequence in the human genome. So there you go. Well, this is true in humans but
is it just humans? No. Here it is in Drosophila. This was actually a classic study by
Begun & Aquadro in 1992 in Nature. This paper at the time of recording
was already sited well over 550 times. So very popular study. But again you see here on the X axis
it's coefficient of exchange which is essentially recombination. And on the Y axis here is Pi and
you see this general positive trend. This, again, potentially suggests
the spread of adapted variance. We'll come back to this,
actually, in the next video. Here's the same thing in
various tomato species. Yet again, you see this higher
pi region of high recombination. This wasn't as compelling, but
it was weakly statistically significant, so that's cool. Yeast, in contrast, I don't actually
show you a picture of it, but it actually doesn't really
match the expectation. There is no significant positive or
negative relationship. It could be this case that
yeast tend to reproduce asexually very often rather than sexually,
potentially reducing this opportunity. Now let me ask what does this overall
pattern, not the yeast part, but for humans, tomatoes, drusafulla. What does this mean? Well we see that there's a positive
association between recombination rate and pi in many, many different species. Now, this relationship, again, is predicted from
the action of natural selection. And not just any natural selection. But specifically,
the spread of adaptive variant, right? That we have this adaptive
variance spreading. And we have a selective sweep associated
with it, hitchhiking of nearby alleles. What this means, the fact that we see
this positive association looking across the whole genome, is,
the selection's impact on genomes is huge. And basically selection is
happening all the time. We have adapted variance spreading
within species all the time. And that's creating this overall pattern. Selection is strong, Darwin was right. Well let me ask you, can we leverage this? Well the answer is yes. And we can leverage this
in an interesting way. Now we expect the regions of low
recombination to have low variation or low pi. Now what would happen,
this is actually a fictitious data point. I actually just drew it in here. What would happen if you
see a very low pi in a very small region of high recombination? What does that actually mean? So let's say you have this region
with very high recombination but very low nucleotide diversity. What might you expected happened? Well the answer could be,
now there's a lot of possibilities. The answer could be, it could suggest
there was a very recent selective sweep. Could suggest that basically
very recently you had an adaptive variant with
the last couple of hundred or couple of thousand years spread through
all the populations of this species. And eliminate variation
at nearby neutral sites. People do and have been doing and
are continuing to do is we're using this to actually find genes that have
experienced recent selection. Looking across the genome at regions
that we know have high recombination and thus should have high pi,
high nucleotide diversity. But when we see a small stretch
of it that has unusually low pi, that could suggest that there has
been a recent selective sweep and that there might be a very
interesting gene to study there. Now this overall pattern I've described
to you in the context of this sort of adaptive variance spreading
through the population, these frequent sweeps
through the population. There is an alternative hypothesis. So alternative hypothesis for why pi and recombination rate may be correlated
is referred to as background selection. We'll come back to background
selection in the next video.