Hello, welcome back to introduction to
introduction of genetics and evolution. In the previous video we talked about this
association between recombination rate and the pi overall. We suggested that one
possible explanation for why there's this positive association
between recombination rate and pi just because you have frequent
selective sweeps across the genome. This reduces a lot of variation
in regions of low recombination, making it so they have low pi. Reduces little variation has higher
recombination, making them so they can sustain high pi. Now, background selection is
an alternative explanation for this pattern, and this is a continuing
heated debate within the field of evolutionary biology in terms of
its role relative to the other one. I already gave you the positive
view of the world, this idea that official mutations around
the genome cause this association between the recombination and pi,
this spread of adaptive variance. This was pioneered by these two fellas,
David Begun and Chip Aquadro. Chip Aquadro's at Cornell, David Begun's at now at
the University of California at Davis. Now, again, their ideas that there's very
frequent selective sweeps on the genome and that's what causes this
overall positive association. Now, the question is, what if beneficial
mutations are actually very rare? Not just somewhat rare, but very rare. Well, if that's true, then you won't actually see a very strong
overall trend, because you'll actually have a lot of low recombination regions
that may still have very high pi, right? If you're not having a selective sweep
that's eliminating the neutral variation there, they might sustain
a fairly high pi. Well, in response to this an alternative
hypothesis was posed by this fellow, this is professor Brian Charlesworth at
the University of Edinburgh in Scotland. He suggested bad mutations are very
common, which we know is true of course. When a bad mutation happens interesting
what it'll do is it'll doom that allele, and essentially the areas nearby it,
to eventual death. That over some period of time, even if you had a bad variant it may be
slow to get removed from a population, but it ultimately will be
removed from the population. We saw this with some of
those allele A1 simulations of detrimental variants
that we did earlier. Now importantly the size of the doomed
window varies with recombination rate. The size of this doomed window is
going to vary with recombination rate. This process is referred
to as background selection. Now let me illustrate this for you. So let's imagine background selection in
a region with low or no recombination. And what we have depicted here is
background selection in the region of low or no recombination. So we have several neutral sites here. These blue ones are neutral. Okay, so this is essentially
what diversity doesn't matter. And we have here a set of bad mutations
that have arisen in this population. We see we have a lot of bad mutations, we're assuming that these
are fairly frequent. So what's going to happen? Well, all these chromosomes, if there's no recombination all these
ones that have a bad mutation are doomed. That they will not persist in the
population, eventually they will go away. So the only ones that persist are these. These are the only ones that will
contribute to long future generations. In that regard you notice we've lost
all variation at those blue sites. Now everybody's T and
everybody's C because we've got rid so many different variants. And this is what happens when you have
a region of low or no recombination. What if you have high recombination? Now, in this case I'm putting in something
kind of like recombination hot spots, that's what those vertical bars are. We have the same two variable sites that
we had before with the same frequencies and we have the same bad mutations. What happens now, we now just lose those segments that
actually have the bad mutations. These are not deletions,
they're not cut out of the chromosomes. It's just, when you're looking at how much
variation is lost from the population, those pieces would get lost. But, the areas around it can persist
because they can recombine away. So when you look at it now and
you look at the two variable sites, you still retain quite a bit of variation. This is the important difference here,
that a lot more variability is being retained because the bad mutations
can be lost without dragging away so much of the rest of the chromosome. So what is the prediction
of background selection? Well, background selection assumes, and it depends upon having very
high rates of bad mutation. We know that's true. What it predicts is that
regions of high recombination, where you have hotspots
that are close together, or numerous hotspots,
will preserve more variation, high pi. So we expect high recombination
to have high pi or low recombination to have low pi. That's exactly the same prediction
as what we saw with selective sweeps and hitchhiking. So, where are we? Well this is kind of a big debate. We see this association
between recombination rate and nucleotide variation as measured as pi. Now could be that's resulting
from selective sweeps that these new advantageous mutations are arising
fairly frequently and as they spread and fix they are taking away
most of this variation. And neutral theory says that
this should be very rare. The neutral theory does not deny
that selective sweeps occur but it's just that they should be really rare. In contrast background selection, so just that there's bad
mutations happening all the time. And getting rid of them is
what drags away variation. Now the neutral theory has
no problem with this and this also generates the same prediction. We don't actually know
which of these is true. This comes back to that neutralist
selectionist debate that I suggest. This is essentially
the new iteration of that. And this is very much an area
of active research today. There's definitely continued disagreement. Here is a picture from a 2007 study
looking at Drosophila simulans. The green there depicts
levels of recombination, the blue depicts levels of
nucleotide diversity measured as pi. And again,
you see a fairly high correlation when recombination rate is high and
nucleotide variation is high. Now Begun argues it's mostly
from hitchhiking, and he's shown that many beneficial
mutations have actually been identified. Charlesworth argues that we know
many more cases of bad mutations. So, let me give you a couple
of perspectives on this. I actually contacted these people
to get their input directly. Now, the recommended textbook that we have
for you, the Freeman and Herron book says, the current consensus is that
hitchhiking is probably responsible for the most dramatic instances of reduced
polymorphism in linked regions, while background selection
causes the less extreme cases. This is kind of a balanced view. Now, Begun tends to think background
selection is not very important at all. He says, there's no convincing evidence
the background selection is a significant factor in Drosophila
genome evolution at all. This is from an e-mail
dated 28th of February. So that's one end of the spectrum. And at the other end Dr. Charlesworth was a little bit
less diplomatic in his wording. But he refers to a particular paper,
saying that they, make a reasonable case that the reduced
variability on the Y chromosome and the fourth chromosome, these
are chromosomes that have no recombination within species, can be explained very
thoroughly by background selection. Well, it's very much an area
that's still unsettled. Here's somebody else who's
kind of in the middle. The controversy surrounding the relative
significance of strongly beneficial and deleterious mutations in evolution has
stimulated research activities for almost a decade. Despite efforts from many theorists and empiricists, fundamental
questions are still open. Basically the answer is
we don't really know. [LAUGH] But again, still very much
an active area of research today. How much of this correlation
between recombination rate and nucleotide diversity comes from
adaptive variations spreading or from bad mutations being
eliminated from the population? Well, you can think about that yourself. Thanks for your time. I hope you enjoyed this video.