Hello, and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. I created this bonus video because some
of the students in the class said they'd really like to see a more challenging
recombination problem of the types that we discussed, but going further than the
examples that you saw in the early videos, so let's dive right in,
let me start with a few assumptions. The assumptions that we'll be looking at
here is that we're scoring offspring from a backcross, this is a key word here. So, a backcross is a pairing between an individual that is heterozygous for
all three markers that we're looking at. To another individual that's
homozygous for all three markers. So, the offspring from this are called the
backcross offspring, ro backcross progeny. Thos are what we're scoring. Now, in scoring those offspring,
what we're actually measuring is recombination that occurred And
the meiosis of the heterozygous parent. That's what we're actually examining by
looking at the genotypes of the offspring. Now, the way we're gonna do this
is we're going to identify and delete the contributions from
the homozygous parent to all the offspring Now, the homozygous parent may very
well have had plenty of recombination. We actually can't tell
since they are homozygous, if they have a recombination event,
for example, between A and BG. And if they're homozygous big A, big A,
big B, big B, we can't tell the difference between one big A and the other big A or
one big B and the other big B. So, what we'll do is we'll
look at the offspring and we'll figure out what the homozygous
parent contributed and just take that out. What that leaves us with is
effectively what was in the gametes of that heterozygous parent, whose meiosis
and recombination were steadying. So, the second step will
then be to infer the phase of alleles in the heterozygous parent. Basically, the combination of
alleles that were on the same chromosome that came into that parent. This is sometimes referred
to as gametic phase as well. The third step will be to infer gene
order in the heterozygous parent, basically again like what
happened in the earlier videos, we'll try to figure out which gene it
was most likely to be in the middle and the last step will be determining
the recombination fractions. So, here's a sample problem, if you like, feel free to pause the video
right now try this on your own. Otherwise, I'm just going to go ahead and
launch in. Here's the problem, we see that the set of individuals
on the left are heterozygous for D. The individuals on the right
are homozygous for little d. We see individuals here
are EEEe We see Ff. We see ff. So, what are we do? Well the first step, as I said, was to identify the contributions from
the homozygous parent and delete. Now, how to we figure out what
the homozygous parent gave? Well the homozygous parent is
always giving the same alleles. So, looking at all of
these offspring here. So, looking at for example the D gene. What does every single individual here in
the left column and right column have? They have one allele that is shared by
all individuals, which allele is that? Well, that would be the little D. For the E gene, it's the capital E,
and for the F gene, it's the little F. So, these are clearly the contributions
from the homozygous parent. So, the homozygous parents,
let's just say it was the dad Would have been little d little
d big E big E little f little f. So, we've identified their contributions,
the next step we do is we delete them. So, we literally just boom they're gone,
[LAUGH] so now we're looking at basically
the eggs of the mom. So, these are the eggs from the mom
because we've taken out what the dad put into the offspring, so now what we
have here is what was in the egg Eggs, the unfertilized eggs from the mom. So, the next thing we do is we try to
infer the phase, and again this is sometimes called gametic phase if
you try to Google it or something. The way we identify that is you look
at the two most abundant classes and those are the ones that
are in the parental phase. So, looking at this,
these two are the most abundant, big D, little e, little f, and
little d, big E, big F. So, what that suggests is the heterozygous
parent had one homologous chromosome with big D, little e and little f,
another one with little d, big E, big F. I should emphasize, that the heterozygous parent thing in
the top right there is un-ordered. We don't know that
the order of genes is Def. But we know that is the phase that
capital DU is with a little e,u, with little f for example. So, we infer the phase here, that we don´t
know the order so let´s figure that out. Well, the next step is to
infer the order of the genes. So, do you remember how we did that? In the past the way we did
that is we looked at the two least abundant genotypic classes. In this case, it would be these two. Big D, big E, big F,
little d, little e, little f. So, these are the double crossovers,
right? They're double recombinants, excuse me,
double recombinant individuals. So, let's compare those two
classes with the parental phase. So, we have the parental phase this
is just the same thing from this top right corner brought down, and
here's the double recombinant. Now, when we look at that,
there should be alleles, that are basically in same same phase
as the parent and one that's different. Right, so in each of these things. And if you look at the top,
if you look at the top row, little e and little f are together,
in the parental and the double recomment. D is different. On the bottom side, little d, or I'm sorry
we have big E and big F, big E and big F, but we see the d's are not
in the same orientation. What that suggests is this is a double
recombinant d must be in the middle. Because in order to go from the parentals
to the double recombinant you need two recombination events okay? So, since d is the oddball d is the one
that is not in the same phase as the other two That suggests that the heterozygous
parent had this gene order. We already had the phase from before but now we know that the D
gene is in the middle. So, we have little e, big D, little f,
on one homologous chromosome and big E, little d,
big F on the other homologous chromosome. Ok? So, now we have both the phase and
we have the gene order. So, the last step is to figure
out the recombination fractions. Well we have the phase here, so
this is fairly straightforward. So, we look and see which are recombinant
relative to that parental phase. So, let's start doing these in order. Let's compare D to E. So, comparing gene E to gene D, the ones
that are in red there are the recombinant ones because you see they are not
in the same Phase as to the parent. Because in the parent little E is with
big D, and big E is with little D. In these ones I've highlighted big D and
big E are together or little D and little E are together. So, when we total up those four
numbers it comes out to 36. There's 1000 total individuals so the
recombination fraction here is point 036, Or 3.6%. Do the same thing for genes D and F. And again we see the same
sort of pattern here. Again, D and F in the parent are in
phase big D little F, or little d big F. So, big D big F, or
little D little F are now recombinant. So, when we add those
numbers up we get 94, okay? So, the recombination fraction in
this case would be 0.094 or 9.4%. We can stop there because
that's probably good enough. But let's go ahead and
take it one step further and look at between Gene E and Gene F. It should be close to but not exactly
the sum of those two fractions. So, we do that,
okay in these case genes little e and little f are together and big e and
big f are together in the parent. So, recobinants would be the ones
that are in opposite case, so these ones are all recombinant okay? And we total up those numbers. It's a 122. Again that is close to but
slightly smaller than the sum total of the distance from gene e to gene
gene d plus from gene d to gene f. So, at this point, we've solved the entire
thing., we can actually draw it out. This is what we expect
the parent looked like, so that we have the order,
the phase, and the distances or the recombination fractions
between each of those genes. So, there we go. We've solved a more complex problem. I hope you didn't think
that was too difficult. I know I did it a little bit quickly, but
feel free to go through the video again. Pause and work it through yourself. One thing I want to come back to though is
looking at the overall procedure, first we identified and deleted the contributions
from the homozygous parent, right? That was the first step, the second was to infer the phase of
alleles in the heterozygous parent which again we use that by looking at
the most abundant two genotypic classes. We then infer the gene order in
the heterozygous parent by looking at the least abundant two genotypic classes
and comparing that to the phase of the parent, and the last one is
determining the recombination fractions. So, I wanna bring things back and connect to the videos that
are coming up by pointing this out. Why should you care,
like this cute kid here? Well, again genetic mapping is used for localizing genes that
effect traits of interest. It's not letters there's no gene d,
gene e, gene f but this used this is procedure that is done
everyday to localize genes causing human disease, to localize traits of
agriculture interest for example and yes even though you have a gene sequence
even for humans we don't know the function of all the bases, so we don't necessarily
know where the gene of interest is. We don't necessarily know just
by having a genome sequence there's the spot that causes
Alzheimer's when it mutates. And we also don't know the phase or
order of genes automatically. This is the procedure by
which genes are found. When people talk about
finding genes influencing likelihood of getting diabetes or
something like that. This is the kind of thing that happened. There are other procedures as
well which we'll go into shortly, but this is the type of
procedure that happens. Well, I hope you found this helpful. I hope this was a useful bonus video for
you. Thank you so much, have a great day.