Hello.
Welcome back to Introduction to Genetics and Evolution. I decided to add this extra, short video
because several people expressed that they didn't know a little bit about
the scales organization of genetic data. Now, we talk about genes, and we talk
about how they affect the phenotype, and we talk about how they are hereditary,
we mentioned DNA but we never really said
anything about how is it that the DNA sequence encoded in
genes actually affects phenotypes. That could easily be the topic for
an entire course. In fact it is a topic for many courses. But others introduce just some very basic
concepts just to help you understand the context of the class that we're doing
right now on genetics and evolution. And how is genetic information
translated into phenotype? Now we've already talked about how DNA
is the primary hereditary material. That is the material that is
organizing chromosomes that is passed from parents to offspring that is
allowing this mechanism for heredity. Now there are sections within chromosomes
that have specific instructions and these sections are referred to as genes. This is a term that you hear all the time. Now the question that I'm
posing to you know is what, or how does this impact the phenotype? How is it that the DNA sequence that's
present in these different genes actually changes your hair color? Or your eye color or
your personality or your IQ. Well a lot of this, not all it,
a lot of this is done through protein. Now you hear the term proteins all
the time in the context of your diet. You know, are you getting enough protein,
this kind of food is high in protein. And in fact, proteins are vitally
important to many many aspects of your health, well being and development. Some proteins are structural. They're basically putting you together. Some are mechanical. They're essential proteins in various,
your muscles for example. Some of them are biochemical. The enzymes that you use for
digesting your food for example are largely protein based. And they can even affect
things like cell signaling. So your hormones for
example have protein components. You know,
the central dogma of molecular biology. This is a fundamental principle. And this is an oversimplification,
I should stress ahead of time. But, it is nonetheless a fundamental
principle of molecular biology, is that there are three primary
levels of genetic information. They are also interrelated to each other. Now DNA, as we talked about, is that
hereditary material that is passed to offspring but it also replicates itself,
both inside your body and in the context of transmitting this
genetic information to your offspring. So DNA replicates itself. DNA also produces RNAs. And we'll focus on one particular kind of
RNA here, referred to as messenger RNA. Messenger RNA is an intermediate
between DNA and protein. There are some forms of RNA that
are directly functional but again we'll be emphasizing it
in this video the messenger RNA. Those ones which are actually putting
together the protein sequence. These messenger RNA's
are translated into protein. Now, the structure and content of
these proteins are what directly impacts your phenotype or how you look,
how you feel, how you act. Now, proteins are actually
composed of chains of amino acids. Again, you've probably heard the term
amino acids in the context of things you wanna get particular
kinds of in your diet but if you look over here on the right
we have a string of amino acids. Now this would be part of a protein. If we zoom in on some and we see a particular amino
acid that you've heard of. I know alanine, leucine,
serime, et cetera. Now how is it we get from
DNA to these proteins? Aside from having this RNA intermediate. Let's talk about each
step just very briefly. So, the first step is DNA forming this
RNA, specifically this messenger RNA. Well, the formation of messenger RNA from
DNA is referred to as transcription. Now, as you may remember
from other courses, DNA is double stranded and you have this,
you have this complimentary pairing So for DNA to DNA you always have
these four different types. A C G and T. These are the four different
nucleotides of DNA. A always binds with T. C always binds with G. G always binds to C. And T always binds to A. And we see that right here. So here's DNA to DNA. A to T. A to T. T to A. C to G.
G to C. Now when you're producing the messenger
RNA you have the same sort of complementary relationship, except in
this case the T is replaced with a U. So this is a uracil. So in addition to being
a different sort of compound. A DNA is deoxyribonucleic acid. RNA is just ribonucleic acid. It doesn't have the deoxy facet to it. You see it has the same sort
of complimentary pairing. So we have a double strand of
DNA has been separated out and we have this RNA transcript that's
being produced in the middle and you have this same sort of
relationship with nucleotides. So you're essentially making
a copy of the DNA as RNA. You know,
the sequence here of this RNA transcript, exactly matches the one
here at the bottom. Aside from the switch from T to U. See TACTGCC, UACUGCC. Et cetera. So this how the DNA is making
its copy as messenger RNA. Now what happens is this RNA copy of
the gene sequence will leave the cell, I'm sorry, leave the cell nucleus,
it will enter the cytoplasm and that's where it directs
the formation of these amino acid. So here this messenger RNA,
when it comes out. has to produce these amino acid chains. The term for this translation from messenger RNA
to amino acid chains is translation. This says we are taking this
messenger RNA sequence and we are making it into a very
specific string of amino acids. It's not just any amino acids but
it's very specific. And again we have a code,
just like the code we saw before. Now this code for translation uses
three nucleotides at a time or three bases at a time. So this is a triplet code. So what happens, it's looking at
the messenger RNA here at the bottom. We have an AUG. That is associated with
one particular amino acid. ACG, this is associated with
another amino acid, GUA, it's associated with another amino acid,
et cetera. So it's going in this triplet code. Three nucleotides at a time. From messenger RNA to the resulting
string of amino acides, okay. This will continue, until it gets to
what's referred to as a stop codon. There are three diffeent stop codons,
this is one of them. UAA. UAA is not associated with an amino acid, and it terminates the production
of the string of amino acids. So continue adding these on until you get
to a stop codon, and then boom, done. We have completed the process. So let me show you how you
actually identify these. There are tables,
these are referred to as codon tables, that show you what AUG stands for, what
UAA stands for, in terms of amino acids. But here is a standard genetic code table. Here's AUG, as you saw before, as. That is correct, according to this table. UAA was the stock code on,
as you saw before, as well. But you see all the different
combinations; there's 64 different combinations. That's because it's 4 since there's
4 nucleotides to the 3rd power cause it's a triplet code. So 4 to the 3rd is 64 and
that's the size of this table. There's 64 possibilities here of which
61 are associated with amino acids. 3 of them are not. There's three stop codons. They are not associated with amino
acid but we can immediately translate. CCC will give you a Proline. An AAA in the message line will
give you a Lysine amino acid. So we have this perfect genetic code for
putting these things together. Now, before closing may introduce
some areas of the genome, because I'll be using these terms occasionally and
I want you to be familiar with them. Again, as I mentioned before, genes are these areas that have
amino acid coding segments. Not all of the gene, however,
codes for an amino acid. There are some segments
of genes that don't. And one example of a segment of a gene
that does not so is the intron. Introns are areas within genes that are
actually spliced out of the messenger RNA. So, an RNA is produced from large segment
of the gene, but then these intron regions just essentially get cut out of the final
messenger RNAs that's put together. As a result of that, they do not
affect the final amino acid sequence. [INAUDIBLE] That's a very important point. So, intron sequences do not affect
the final amino acid sequence. The other region I'll introduce to you is
what's referred to as intergenic regions. These are the areas that
are found between genes. Now, just because it's not found in a
protein coding gene does not mean it's not important. Does not mean that it
does not have a function. In fact, a lot of these intergenic
regions are functional. Several of them regulate how
much messenger RNA is produced. Especially from neighboring genes but not
exclusively and some times the intergenic regions even produce other types of
RNAs that we've talked about here. So let me give you a fictitious example,
these are three real genes but I've diagrammed them
not how they truly are. So let's say there's the check two gene. Check two you may have heard of,
because there is mutations in it that are associated with a fivefold
greater risk of breast cancer. I have another gene
here I refer to as NF2. Another gene here, I refer to as Sox3. I've depicted them again, fictitiously, so that they're not actually right
next to each other, like this. So check to as I predicted
here would have this. Also codes for a messenger RNA. And ultimately that is really
to amino acid sequence. But maybe a segment here,
this is the intergenic region. This segment right here
may actually affect, depending on the DNA
sequence that is found here, may affect how much of this check two
messenger RNA is actually produced. So this segment is actually
vitally important and it effects how much of is produced,
which will then also potentially effect how much of the protein
is ultimately produced. It does have a function, but its sequence does not affect the amino
acid sequence of this check to protein. Nf2's expect two has large regions that
are associated with amino acid sequence, but also has an intron. So the messenger RNA is ultimately
produced from Nf2 in this fictitious example. But it has sequence attached
to this sequence, but the middle part would not be present. Even though is there in the gene itself,
it is not found in the messenger RNA. Sox10 similarly has this
large coding segment, this protein coding segment, this protein
coding segment but as two introns. Again, those two introns would not
be found in the final protein. And again, both of these may have other
sections here in the intergenic DNA that are regulating. How much of the messenger is
produced of those two genes as well. This was a i just wanna introduce
some of these terms to you. Code, i want you to
understand the central DNA, makes messenger RNA, which affects
amino acids sequence of proteins and I want you to notice that the genes these
particular areas referred to as introns that do not affect the final
amino acid sequence of protein. I hope that was helpful and
I hope it was interesting. Thank you for joining.