Hello and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In this set of videos,
we are looking at evolutionary trees and the study of phylogenetics, or
the relationships among organisms. In the preceding video, we talked about
how to read an evolutionary tree. In this video we're gonna look at
generating evolutionary trees. And I'll give you the opportunity to
generate your own evolutionary tree using some DNA sequence data
by the end of this video. So let's get started. What do we need to generate
an evolutionary tree. Well we need to look
at a set of traits and decide on similarity among
the organisms being studied. So this is a set of four organisms that
I showed you in the preceding video. So what traits should we use? Well I pictured just a random
set of four traits and you'll see that the answer isn't
totally straight forward of what we do. That we can look at the exterior and say hairy versus having
feathers versus smooth. Well how would this categorize these? Well this one is hairy,
the one's got feathers, this one's smooth, this one's hairy. So we should say the spider and
the guinea big are more closely related. That is a little bit funny. Let's look at the others. Which ones have a back bone and
which does not? Having a back bone would be that these
two have a backbone, these two do not. That might be okay. What about something else? What about number of legs? Well here we have eight, here we have six,
here we have two, here we have four. Well that's not useful at all. And the last thing is what about
presence or absence of wings? Well that was the example I showed
you in the preceding video, that these two have wings,
and those two did not. So you can see, it's not clear what to do
when you're looking at a single character. And you can, in fact, be misled
when looking at single characters. So, the way this is addressed in
practice is that we try to study the weight of evidence, especially by
looking at multiple characters, all right. Then we're looking at
the number of characteristics that favor one set of potential
evolutionary relationships versus another. And I'm gonna talk about this first. Then we're gonna come back to looking
at new versus old characters, and I'll just make a quick comment at
the end about some more in-depth models. So, with respect to similarity, Here's the same set of animals
that we looked at before. And here I've laid out a bunch of
different characteristics, and these are ones that
are potentially useful. What do we see when we look at this? Well, Taxon two which
is the ladybug here and Taxon three being the wood duck, they
share the fact that they both have wings. Okay. In contrast, the spider and
guinea pig do not. For all the other characters,
you'll notice that Taxon three and four are similar. These are both,
these both have an endoskeleton, their skeleton's inside their body,
whereas these both have an exoskeleton. These two are warm-blooded,
whereas these are cold-blooded, but that's a little bit of a cheat that I'm
not going to talk about in this video. These two have closed circulatory systems,
these two have open. These two have simple eyes,
whereas these two have complex eyes. And these two have a backbone
whereas these do not. So, on balance, when you look at
the weight of all the evidence here. You see that there is a strong
relationship between Taxon three and four as being similar, and one and two being different from them, even though
this category of wings throws that off. But I have to emphasize that
similarity is not enough. You can't just make a good evolutionary
tree based on similarity alone. Instead, we end up having to look
at new versus old characters. Characters that evolved fairly recently
versus ones that may have been retained since the most recent common ancestor. Now let me show you why this is true. Similarity alone can be misleading
when you're looking at old or reputatively ancestral characters, characters that have been around
potentially since the root of the tree. Now let's imagine your
trait is body color, and let's say the two body colors that
we have here are black and red. And let's say the ancestor was black, and
let's say the color of the branch that I put on here is the phenotype or the
appearance that was present at the time. And we have a new mutations in red
that arose right here in the lineage leading to C and D, okay. If you were to go by similarity alone,
C and D are very closely related to each
other because they are both red. And then, A, B, E and F are all
closely related, well is that true? Look at the tree for
a second, is that true? The answer is partially. It is true that C and D are closely
related, as you can see over here, but A, B, E and
F are not particularly closely related. You see that, in fact,
B is more similar to C than B is to A. Because the most recent common
ancestor of B and C is right here, whereas B and A is further back. So this works for new or
derived traits, traits that have arisen during the evolutionary time of
the tree that you're looking at. This now assumes that changes
are infrequent, and again, this tends to work just for
the newly evolved or derived trait. Now, how can we leverage this to actually
study evolutionary relationships? The fact this only works for the derived traits in identifying
which are most closely related. So this leads to what's referred to as
the parsimony method for tree-building. Basically what we're gonna do is
we're gonna compare the traits to what we believe the ancestor would
have had in terms of the trait. Now typically speaking the ancestor
not usually still around, we don't usually get to look at them. So what people do in practice is they look
at what's referred to as an out group. So, for example let's say you were
looking at phylogeny of insects. Let's say these were
all different insects. The out group you might use might be for
example, a spider. So something that's similar but clearly
not an insect and so it's just outside. Using the spider, and looking at all these
insects, you would then try to identify which forms for each trait are ancestral,
or basically have been around since that common ancestor and might, for
example, be present in spiders as well. Or if they're derived,
a trait that has risen within the evolutionary history of
insects that you're trying to study. So what you're gonna do then is
we're going to construct a tree using the minimum number of changes
from the ancestral form to derived form. Right the minimum number of possible
changes, you'll be using for actually looking at relationships, you'll be using
what we refer to as shared derived traits. The technical term for
this is synapomorphies, but don't worry about that. You're looking for shared derived traits. In this tree right here,
the ancestral trait is black, right? Black body color. The derived trait is red. So, which individuals
share the derived trait? The derived trait is red, the individuals
that share it are Taxon C and Taxon D. So the assumption here is
that the simplest tree is correct in terms of
these derived characters. I'm looking specifically at those. So that places C and
D as being close relatives. This tree also uses the minimum number
of changes because it only requires one change. So what would have happened instead? So we have A-B-C-D-E-F and
you see there's the common ancestor. What would happen if instead C was more
closely related to F, for example? Well, let's take a look at what
that tree would have to look like. Well there it is. Now C is most closely related to F,
D is more closely related to E. I just changed the tree around. This in contrast to the proceeding
one requires two changes, right? We have to have a mutation from
the ancestral form of black to red, in the lineage leading to C. And mutation from black to red
in the lineage leading to D. This requires two mutations now. Why is that? What if the mutation was way
back over here somewhere. Well with mutation, what happened way
back here, E and F would also be red. But instead we just have D and C being
red, so this now requires two mutations. So this is clearly not
the most parsimonious tree. Now I won't say this tree is not possible. We don't necessarily know
the simplest answers always correct. But it's not the simplest possible tree. Now the important thing
to keep in mind here is all of this is showing the fact that C and D have the shared derived character is
that they are more closely related. It actually says nothing about
the rest of the evolutionary tree. So what about A, B, E and F? Well, we can move them someplace else. Now I put E and F over here,
and A and B over here. This is actually just as parsimonious
as the first tree I showed you. So all you're able to infer from
looking at all this is C and D are close relatives and you don't know the
relative relationships of A, B, E and F. So ultimately, making a tree using the
parsimony method requires that you have to use multiple characters. Or if you are using, say, DNA sequence you'll use multiple
nucleotide positions within a DNA sequence to place all the species you're
studying onto the tree, okay. Cuz you can only look at those
shared derived characters. So let's do an example. So this is a pretty straightforward
example where we have an out group species, right, and we have its set
of characters for a particular trait. We're going to use the out
group species to infer which form of each trait is ancestral or
derived, okay. We have four species, let's go ahead and
draw a tree, based on what we've got here. We already know that the out
group is more distantly related, that is just defined as such. When we look at these different traits, what do we see in terms of these
shared derived characters? That is the most important thing we are
looking for, shared derived characters. For trait number four, the derived
character is only found in species A. So it's not shared. It's not a shared derived character, it's just a derived character
found in species A. That's actually not useful for
phylogenic inference at all. Let's draw a line through that. We'll actually come back to that in
just a second, but it's not useful for phylogenic inference. Trait number three, what do we see? The derived character is two legs,
cuz the ancestral form might be four. And we see is that all
four species share that. That's actually not particularly useful
either for phylogenic inference. So we might say right here there's
a transition in trait three, from having four legs to two legs. We don't actually know it's right there, could be the link is going
to the out group too. But just for ease of argument,
let's just put it right there. So that doesn't really
help us a whole lot. What about trait two? Well here, the out group has four arms. Species D also has four arms but
these three have two arms. So we have a derived form, two arms, and
we have it shared by species A, B and C. So given it's shared by A, B and C that would infer that D
is more distantly related. It does not share the derived character. We have a transition point right here for trait two, going from four arms
to two arms in taxon A, B, and C. For the last one here, our out group has four eyes, species D has
four eyes, and species B has four eyes. But A and C share the derived character. So in that case we can say
B comes out over here. And A and C are the closest relatives. So we can place in here that extra
transition for trait one right there. So this shows all the transitions so. Here's the point in time right there
on the evolutionary tree where trait one transitions from
four eyes to two eyes. Here's where trait two transitioned
from four arms to two arms. Here's where trait three from
four legs to two legs, possibly. It could be on this other branch. And then,
I mentioned trait four over here. We can go ahead and place it on there. That would be right there. It doesn't particularly help
evolutionary inference, but we can place it on
the tree nonetheless. So, what would happen
if we add a character that doesn't agree with
the other characters. Hm. Well here's trait five. When we look at this we have the out
group having no wings and A and D share the derived form. A and D were not sister
species as you saw before. Let's look at the possible
alternative trees here and let's place all the characters on there
and see how many transitions it takes. The left version of this has
the derived version of trait five arising only a single time. Here it is, trait five arises once and
it clusters in A and B. Or I'm sorry, A and D, I said that wrong. So what does this do to the other things? Well, because of this if we assume
that this one is right and the others are wrong, then traits one and two have to
have arisen twice somewhere in the tree. It can't have just arisen once, because if we assume trait five is
correctly reflecting evolutionary history, then traits one and
two have to have arisen twice. In contrast, the tree on the right
assumes that first tree that we saw, and this is assuming that
trait five arose twice. So here's trait five once, and
here's trait five a second time, and that's what makes A and
D similar to each other in that context. But here we have traits one, two, three,
and four all arising only a single time. So, how many changes do
each of these require? Let me clear all these circles so
you can see a little bit better. Well over here we have one,
two, three, four, five, six, seven changes, right,
to make this evolutionary tree. In contrast, this one over here
requires only six changes. So which of these is more parsimonious? The answer is the one on
the right is slightly more parsimonious because it only involves
six changes, rather than seven changes. Now the way I did this, there are other
ways you could actually make the same tree if you have changes going, for
example, to one form and then back. But no matter how you do it, this tree
is slightly more parsimonious because there's no way to make the trees that
would involve fewer than six changes. So let me give one for you to try. Here's one for you to try. This now, I've changed a little bit so now this involves DNA sequences instead of
wings or no wings, four legs or two legs. But the principle is exactly the same. Now you might be slightly panicked. What!
How do I do this? So let me break it down for you. First thing you do is you just
look at what are the sites that are variable, right? Well these are the sites that are variable
on the tree, or on the sequence. So we have traits, this is equivalent
to the same trait one, two, three, four, and five. So that's pretty straight forward and what
you do is you're comparing the out group to the four species and you're seeing
which of them share the derived form. And then from that I want you
to make an evolutionary tree, so why don't you pause the video for
just a second. Try to construct a tree and
then I'll give you three choices and then I want you to do the in video
quiz to try each of the three choices. See which choice it is. Okay, so go ahead and stop the video for
a second and construct a tree. Hopefully you've all ready stopped
the video, I'll go ahead and show you the three choices now and then you have to vote which of
the choices it is in the in video quiz. Here are the three possible choices. I hope that wasn't too difficult. So, again, what are we trying to do? We're looking at the shared derived forms. So, I've highlighted here the derived
forms for each of these things. And as you can see, trait two is not
useful because the out group has C. Everybody else has C except for species B. So this does not have a shared derived
form so we can just ignore this one. For the others, trait five is also not
particularly useful because all it has is the out group difference from
the three non-out group species. So,we don't really need this either. The ones that are more useful
are traits one, three and four. So who shares the derived forms? Well for trait one, A and
D share the derived form so we can draw something that clusters A and
D, right. For trait four, again A and
D show the derived form so again A and D. So if we're mark on the tree,
this is where trait one changes and this is also where trait four changes. And then what happens with trait three? Well that clusters B and C together. So this would be the evolutionary
tree that we'd expect. That B and C are clustered
together by trait three, A and D are clustered together by traits one and
four. And theoretically if we were to put the
other things on there, this is where trait five would have transitioned or
potentially the out group lineage. Right before trait,
right before species B, you'd have the trait two one if
you were to place it all on there. Essentially B and C are sisters,
A and D are sisters. The question to ask is,
is the answer right? Well, the real answer
is that we don't know. Parsimony doesn't always result in a tree that accurately reflects what
happened over evolutionary history. Because you can have similarity in some
traits that doesn't reflect ancestry, but reflects a convergence, that you had
two mutations that happened to go to A at the same site,
that made them become more similar. That's often referred to as convergence, and those traits are often
referred to as homo plastic. You basically can't have these shared
derived traits evolving more than once, and it's something that
there's no way around. Now, the way people have tried to address
this is to use various model-based methods, such as maximum likelihood
methods or basing methods, and those often do better, but
they're still not always correct. They're not 100% correct, and different
genes may give you different trees. The next video will talk about
an application of phylogenetic trees for testing evolutionary hypotheses. Under the assumption that
your tree is correct, or at least very likely to be correct. Thank you. I hope you enjoyed this video.