Hello, and welcome back to
Introduction to Genetics in Evolution. In the previous video, we talked
about calculating allele frequencies. We talked about calculating
genotype frequencies. And the important thing I emphasized
at the very end of the last video was, with these sorts of assumptions that
gametes just come together at random based on their proportions,
we end up with a stable equilibrium. And, in essence, the allele
frequencies don't change over time. The genotype frequencies
don't change over time. That is, by definition, an equilibrium. Now, this pattern was first described
by these three gentlemen here. This is Godfrey Hardy over here. Wilhelm Weinberg over here. So they're the ones who
typically are named for this, as the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. There's also American, William Castle,
who introduced a similar idea around 1903. But, the important thing was
the idea of self perpetuation. This is what I showed you in the end of
the last video that you had an allele, a big A allele frequency
of 0.6 in gametes. They created the seven genotypes with
a little allele, 0.36 with big A, big A, 0.48 with big A, little A,
0.16 with little a, little a. The following generation you would
again have this .6 frequency of the big A gametes and correspondingly the .4 for
the little a. Now, up until 1902, several people
thought that it was possible that the dominate alleles would intrinsically
increase in the population. They are after all called dominant. And some people also assume that rare
alleles would just tend to get lost and have this inherent drive towards loss. Now it was in 1908, and
also probably from the 1903, contribution. Hardy and Weinberg independently showed
that both these assumptions are not true. That if you can just use this purely
probabilistic approach, allele and genotype frequency will
stay completely stable. Now there are assumptions
underlying this and we're gonna come back to those
assumptions in just a moment. Before we come back to that, let's change
this into a more mathematical notation. So let's formalize the math. Now let's say these are typical
notations people use. Let's say the frequency of
big A is referred to as p. Also the frequency of little a,
is referred to as q. Again we're assuming there's only
two alleles in this population. Because there are only two types,
p plus q must necessarily equal one. Plus if p is one,
then q must necessarily be zero. You can't have negative numbers
because these are frequencies. What would the frequency of big A,
big A be? Well, it would be the probability of
a big A encountering another big A. So necessarily,
it would be p times p or p squared. Right, we can push this in P squared for
big A big A. Q squared for little a,little a. 2pq for big A, little a. Why is it 2pq? Why isn't it just pq? Doesn't it just mean a big A and
a little a? Again there are two different
ways you can have it. You can have a big A, sperm and
a little a, egg or a little a, sperm and a big A egg so
there's two different ways you can get it. Again, these genotype frequencies
must necessarily add up to one. So P squared plus two p q
plus q squared equals one. You note that this quantity
squared will come out to that. Right?
P plus Q squared is 2pq plus q squared. So, it all comes out very elegantly. Let me show you how the frequencies
would look if you were to plot these things together
with these assumptions. So what you see in this graph here on
the X axis, are the frequencies of big A, little a. P being the frequency of big A,
q being the frequency of little a. And on the Y axis here, you see the
frequency of the different genotypes that are depicted with the different
colors here as well. So big A, big A's, our p square is in the
red, the little a, q squared is in blue. Green is 2pq, okay? And as you can see the abundance
of the heterozygote peaks out around 50% and
as you get to the two ends you end up having one of the two
homozygotes being completely abundant. Obviously at the extreme end here, if there are no big A's then everybody
in the population must be aa. If there are no little a's, then everybody
in the population must be big A,big A. Now this allows you to infer
genotype frequencies from allele frequencies because you can say,
well I know the allele frequency is .8 for big A and .2 for little a. So you immediately say, oh here's the abundance of big A,big A,
Big A little a, little a, little a. However some assumptions have to be met
and we haven't gotten into that yet. Now let me give you three points. The third is going to come
back to these assumptions. Number one.
You can always know genotype frequencies from genotype counts. I showed you an illustration of that
before, but here it is as an example. Here's big A, big A's, big A little a, little a little a, well all you have to
do to figure out the genotype frequencies from the counts is to add them up to
find the total and divide by the total. So, let's do that. Add them up,
there are 200 total individual. Divide each by 200, and
there are your genotype frequencies. That's all it means, it's just the
relative abundance of the three genotypes. And again,
this always has to add up to 100%. And point number two. You can always know allele frequencies
from genotype frequencies. Let's say for example we have
these three genotype frequencies. We can use this little
trick I showed you before. All the homozygote plus half
of the heterozygote gives you the particular allele frequency. So for example for big A,
all the homozygotes 0.4. Plus half the heterozygote,
which is half of 0.32 or 0.16. It comes out to 0.20. All of this one is 0.64 + half of 0.32 or
0.16 = 0.80. And again they add up to 100%. The third one though,
the third point is you cannot always know genotype frequencies
from allele frequencies. That's what it seemed like we could do
with that figure I showed you earlier, but let me show you why. Let's say, for example, that the frequency of big A's 0.5,
frequency of little a is 0.5. Simple case, right? Well, you could have 0.25,
0.5, and 0.25, right? That adds up to 100%. If you do all of these plus half of these,
that is 0.5. All of these plus half of these,
that's 0.5. That's actually at
the Hardy-Weinberg expectation. But you could also have other
possibilities that don't match the Hardy-Weinberg
expected abundances. You can have this,
0.45 plus half of .10 is still 0.5. This .45 plus half of .10 is still point. You can even have this,
what if you had heterozgotes? Again the little frequencies
here are 0.5 and 0.5. So, the bottom line is
you can always calculate allele frequencies from
genotype frequencies. The reason for this is that alleles
are the ingredients of the genotypes. But you cannot always calculate genotype
frequencies from the allele frequencies, because genotypes are specific
combinations of alleles. Again, just like ingredients. If somebody gave you a pancake, you can
know it's made from flour and sugar and baking powder, and things like that. In contrast, if somebody gave you
flour and sugar and baking powder, there's a lot of different
things you can make with that. Alright many combinations are possible. So coming back to Hardy-Weinberg. Hardy-Weinberg allows predictions
of genotype frequencies from allele frequencies under
certain conditions. And this is when that sort of
simple multiplicative rule applies. Those conditions include random mating. This is where the multiplying
probabilities rule works very well. We don't assume that big A's are more
likely to encounter other big A's than little a's relative to
the proportions in the population. Assumes no selection, migration,
or mutation at that locus. At terms of selection we're assuming
that it's not like the big A, big A individuals tend to die more readily
and therefore they're not constant. Assume an infinite population size and
this is why statistic, or probabilistically, everything
works out very nicely. This is referring to the absence
of what's called genetic drift. We'll come back to this
at a later lecture. But overall,
Hardy-Weinberg is predicting a completely boring population that
probably could never exist. So why bother? Well, the answer is by seeing how populations deviate from Hardy-Weinberg
expected frequencies, we can infer which specific interesting evolutionary
processes may be operating. So we'll come back to this actually over
the course of the next couple of lectures about some specific evolutionary
processes that could be operating. But let's look a little bit at testing for
Hardy-Weinberg. So here's an example. So here we have big A ,big
A is 245 individuals. Big A,little a, is 210 individuals. Little a, little a is 45 individuals. Let's walk through this one to see if
this population is at Hardy-Weinberg and then I'll have you do one later. So the four steps you want to do is
figure out the true genotype frequencies, figure out the true allele frequencies, and then figure out the Hardy-Weinberg
expected genotype frequencies, which may or may not be the same as
the first one, and then ask yourself, do the true frequencies match the expected
frequencies, or close enough to them? So let's do this now. Again, from the genotype counts we can
always get the genotype frequency, you just get the totals 500
divided by the total and here are the genotype types so
that's five. These are the true genotype frequencies
and these true frequencies we can get the true allele frequencies so
all of these and half of these for big A. All of these plus half of these for
little a. Very simple 0.7, 0.3. Now the question is, if we put these
together in the Hardy-Weinberg expected proportions, does it actually
work out as we expect? Is it p squared for big A,big A, 2pq for
big A, little a and q squared for little a? The answer is p2, 0.7 squared, 0.49. That matches beautifully. [SOUND] 0.42, 0.42, matches beautifully. 0.09 to 0.09, matches beautifully. So, yes,
this population is at Hardy-Weinberg. Now, let me ask you to try this next one. See if this one is a Hardy-Weinberg. Try it our yourself using
the same processes we just did. Well thank you,
I hope that wasn't too hard. So again what we do is, we do the first
step is figure out the total. So in this case the total adds up
to 400 + 200 + 400 that is 1,000, nice easy number there for
you to start with. So the genotype frequencies, the true
genotype frequencies in this case, so it would be 400 divided by 1,000 so
that would be 0.40. 200 divided by 1000. 0.20.
400 divided by 1000, 0.40. Okay so
these are our true genotype frequencies. What about our allele frequencies? The allele frequency for big A would
be all of these plus half of these. So that would be 0.4 plus
one half of 0.2 equals 0.5. Q sub little a is equal to
same thing exactly, 0.5. You can check here at this point,
yes, they still add up to 100%. These still add up to 100%. So, the question is, then, do the Hardy-Weinberg expected
genotype frequencies match these? Well, Our expectation for big A,
big A, p squared which would be 0.25. For big A, little a,
it should be 2 pq is equal to 0.5. Little a, little a would be q squared. Q is 0.5.
So that would be 0.25 Uh-oh. These don't match up at all. 0.25 is not the same at 0.40. 0.50 is not the same at 0.20. 0.25 is not the same as 0.40. So, people often tend to think
that this is circular, but as you can see in this case,
it was not actually circular. We actually are seeing
a deviation from the idea that these gametes just come
together at random. Everybody survives it all moves on. So there is a deviation from
Hardy-Weinberg in this case. Now seeing how natural populations deviate
from Hardy-Weinberg expected frequencies. We can actually infer what
evolutionary forces are operating. In that previous slide we saw
a deficit of heterozygotes. There were fewer heterozygotes than
we expected from Hardy-Weinberg. What does that mean in particular. Well we'll look at that as one
possible deviation in the next video. Thank you.