Hello and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In previous videos we talked about
mapping simple genetic traits. Those are traits whose variation is
caused by alleles at a single gene. In the last set of the videos we talked
about how most traits are not simple and various complications associate
with genetic mapping. In this set of videos, we'll look at
how we actually map complex traits. In this first video we'll look
at some of the principles used in mapping such complex traits. So let's get started. Now as I mentioned before,
most variable traits that people study tend to be controlled by many many genes,
not one gene. There is not a single cancer gene. There is not a single diabetes gene. Matter of fact,
there are many genes that contribute to the likelihood you can get something
like cancer, diabetes, schizophrenia etc. Now a couple of other traits that people
have studied extensively are fruit size, this is actually one of the first traits,
fruit size and tomatoes. One of the first traits that was
nailed down to a single gene's effect. There are many genes
that contribute to it but one of the genes was actually identified. Human height is definitely one that
would be controlled by many genes. And a funny one, that a lot of geneticists
study, is bristle number in Drosophila. So, on the back of a fruit fly, you have
all these hairs, these are their bristles. And, something a lot of people try
to map as a quantitative, sort of, trait, where there's a lot of
variation among individuals, are the number of bristles
on the backs of flies. But, obviously, a major focus, especially
coming from the Human Genome Project, was understanding,
the genetic basis of disease. In the last video we use this
fictional simplified example of six genes contributing to human height. And as you saw, each of these genes is
contributing an effect, the a gene, b gene, c gene, d gene, etcetera. These are all contributing
to this variation. And yet, we see this bell curve,
this normal distribution of height. So how do we go about mapping
all these different genes? And again, there's not one height gene. There's a lot of different genes. Well, the concepts for doing this are very simple for
mapping simple single gene traits. Nonetheless, as I mentioned
there many genes contributing. Well again, just like before,
there is two general approaches, we'll come back to these
in subsequent videos. I want to emphasis in this video,
just some of the overlying principles. One of them is mapping the difference
using crosses or pedigrees. And this is exactly what we
do with the simple traits. The other one is mapping variation
within populations, and we'll talk about the genome-wide association study,
often abbreviated as GWAS. I'd like to emphasize a few
points before we get started. First, we often know the locations of
the markers being used ahead of time. So, for using something like, say, mapping
in humans, we have a fully assembled human genome sequence,
we have sites that we know are variable. These so-called SNPS, or
single nucleotide polymorphisms. These have been identified
from genome sequences. So we know where the markers are. However, we don't know the locations
of the genes causing traits or diseases ahead of time, okay? So we know where the markers are but we don't know where the genes
contributing to cancer are. We know there are genes that
are contributing to cancer, but we haven't identified
them ahead of time. The purpose of mapping is to identify
where they are relative to markers. So we're using their linkage to
the markers to find these genes that are causing traits or diseases to identify
where in this vast gene sequence they are, all right? Now we map complex traits
to things we call QTL, that's short for quantitive trait locus. Or if plural, quantitative trait locile
now these are places in the genome, a locus with allelic variation
that influence a phenotype. Now again, ahead of time,
we don't know where these QTLs are. These QTLs are things that we infer from
the data, from the mapping data, right? And at some level, you can think
of them as almost a hypothesis, that we're inferring it's here. But it may not actually be right there,
and we'll come back to this
a little bit later on. How something that we map as a QTL may
not actually be the location of the gene causing the trait. But none the less we infer the approximate
location from the association with market genotypes. Now, very often we detect many
QTLs affecting single traits, so something like height, for example. But, just as before,
the fundamental underlying principle is, we're looking for an association
of marker genotype with phenotype. We're looking for that. And the reason for this is that markers
that are near or linked to the genes, causing different phenotypes, should show
some association with the phenotype. I'll show you what I mean
by this in just a moment. Now if there are many genes, or
if the effect is complicated, the association may not be very strong. So this isn't going to be as precise and
as clear cut as it was before, where we could say, oh, it's one [INAUDIBLE],
1% recombination away from this. This is going to be far less precise. But, it's none of the less possible to
localize the location of these QTLs and therefore the genes are affecting traits. Let me give you an example. Let's imagine you're
crossing some corn strains. Let's say you have some tall corn,
let's say it's five feet tall and some short corn which we'll
say is one foot tall. It will be anomalies short corn,
but let's pretend that's okay. Let's say the F1s,
the offspring, are intermediate. So they're three feet on average. They're pretty consistent
about being three feet tall. Now we cross the F1s together,
to get an F2. And F2 is just a cross from F,
is the offspring from a pair of F1s. Now let's say the F1s show this
range from one feet to five feet. So they recapitulate,
the range seen in the parents. So we get something like a bell curve
around three feet, something like this. Here's one foot, here's five feet. We get a lot of the three feet ones, some
four feet ones, some two feet ones, okay? Now, assuming the height variation is
genetic, how many genes are involved? Is this likely to be something
that is a single gene effect? The answer is really unlikely. There have to be a lot of different
alleles there doing this. So, probably not. It's much more likely to be something
that's caused by many genes. Nonetheless, we know that this height
difference is at least partially genetic. So there are genes affecting height, okay? So let's say we've got a genotype for two markers in the process of mapping this
height difference among the core ones. And let's say the capital letter
ones are the ones from tall, as we're using here A and Z. So let's say we look for
an association between genotype and average phenotype that
comes with that genotype. So here, individuals with markers,
homozygous for the AA marker of three and
a half feet tall. Individuals that are heterozygous for
Aa, three feet tall, and aa are two and a half feet tall. Contrasting the Z marker, ZZ is three feet tall on average, Zz is
three feet tall, zz is three feet tall. Now, when I'm saying this I don't mean
every single individual that's ZZ, Zz, and zz is three feet tall. But the average among individuals
with that genotype and that marker, is three feet tall. So is either marker
associated with a phenotype? Do we see genotypes at these markers,
differentiating the phenotype. Well, obviously the answer is yes. In this particular example, Z is not
associated with a phenotype, right? Because we don't see any difference among
these genotypes in terms of the phenotype. Right here we do see a difference among
the genotypes with the phenotype. Now let me ask you a different question. Why wasn't the association of alleles with
the A marker gene much more complete? Why weren't AA individuals five feet tall? And aa individuals one foot tall? Cuz that's what we saw with the parentals. Why didn't we see that? Well the answer is, all the answers
we talked about last time and one. So there's the possibility that there's
multiple genes affecting the phenotype, this one's very likely to be true. It's possible that there's interactions
among the genes who are at the stasis. All the things we talked about last time,
all these complication. But an additional one that
I wanna factor in here, this is the essence of genetic mapping. There's been recombination between
the marker genes, basically these A and Z genes, and
the genes affecting the phenotype, so an actual gene effecting height. There's some recombination
between those two. What happens then is this
recombination between the marker and genes affecting the phenotype
weaken the association. If you had no recombination at all
between the marker and the trait gene then the marker genotype should very
well predict the phenotype, okay? This especially true if it
was a single gene trait but it's somewhat true even if
it's a trait with many genes. If you have a little bit of recombination
you weaken that association. It still may have some association but
it's weaker. And if there's lots of recombination
then there's no association. Again, this is the fundamental underlying
principle of all genetic mapping. Now, let me ask you this question, how do we pinpoint gene locations
in the middle of all this madness? All right, on a very,
very crude level we can just look for associations between marker
alleles to phenotype. They can say that there's a gene
near there affecting that trait. That's not particularly satisfying. That would be like you're trying to
find somebody who's missing, and you pinpoint them like this. There in this area of
the state of North Carolina. Well, that's not very helpful [LAUGH]. What we really want is fine localization. In this case we wanna be able to point
at a particular spot in the geo, or using this example, a spot on a map and
say the person is in this building here. So what we wanna do to do this is
we want to look at increasing of neighboring markers. We're going to look at
a trajectory of association. We'll look at markers in a sequence,
and as we get closer and closer to the gene with variation
affecting the trait with these different markers, we should see
stronger and stronger associations, okay? Now fine localizations, I mentioned, requires examining associations of
multiple linked markers with the trait. Not completely linked, but
markers that are very close together. And we'll look for a stronger
association i some markers than others. Maybe you'd be asking yourself,
what do I mean by a stronger association? Well, stronger association means
there's a bigger difference between the average phenotypes
associated with the genotypes. So where the Z marker I drew
out before had no association. I'll actually draw that on here
just as an illustration here. So the, oops. The Z marker at three feet,
three feet, three feet. This had no association whatsoever with the trait of interest in
this case being height of course. We'll look at the A one, and
we do see this difference, this is the one we saw before. Here's a B one. Well if you look at this B one,
there is actually a bigger difference between the average phenotypes
associated with the genotype. So let's assume that A and B are near each
other, that let's say here is A, here's B, and let's say Z is very far away. If we see this we say okay,
A has a weak association. B has a stronger association because
we see this bigger average difference. We might infer that the gene causing this
difference in height is probably closer to B than it is to A. So, essentially where we wanted
to focus in near this markerd B. Now again, association will be stronger
when there's less recombination between a marker and
the causative gene or the QTL. So from this we generate a prediction,
if we look at many linked markers, we should be able to pinpoint
the location of the QTL by where the association is strongest or
where we predict it to be strongest. We'll infer a continuing association
going further along there. So to do this, we'll follow
the trajectory of association strength to infer exactly where this QTL will be
and we'll do this in the very next video. Thank you very much for your time. I hope this was helpful.