Hello, welcome back to introductions
to genetics and evolution. In previous videos, we've been looking at
concepts related to the amount of genetic variation in populations relative to
the amount of total phenotypic variation. Now as I mentioned before, this genetic
variation is that subset of variation, which can be used by natural selection. So let's talk about natural selection for
a minute and apply this to a couple of other areas. And very soon, you'll see we'll be
transitioning into population genetics. Well, natural selection is
both noncontroversial and as I mentioned before is
a mathematical inevitability. It's a mathematical inevitability
if three simple conditions are met. First, you have the phenotypic variation. We talked about phenotypic variation
just recently in the context of quantitative genetics. And that would be that Vp is not zero. That basically, everybody doesn't
look exactly the same in every way. Some of that phenotypic variation you
see is actually inherited, or genetic. In that regard, we're saying that
the heritability is not zero. So you see, I'm introducing
the same terms we did before, but now with some quantitative
genetics behind it. And last but not least,
this variation that is inherited, must affect either survival or
reproduction. Let's walk through this
very simple cartoon, which illustrates this point nicely. So here we have several peppers that
vary in their mildness or hotness. There are some that are mild,
some that are hot. So that there is this variation. This variation is inherited. The mild peppers give birth
to other mild peppers. The hot ones breed other hot ones. Here's an interesting point I
haven't emphasized so far, but this is relevant for today's lecture. More individuals are born than
will survive to reproduce. Our capacity for
population growth tends to be very high. We'll come back to this in just a minute. And related to this, some variants survive
or reproduce at higher rates than others. In this case, we can see that the milder
peppers don't survive as well as the hot peppers because the mild ones get
eaten up by things like mice or humans who likes the mild peppers. The outcome of this is that
the population changes over time. That over time as this is
iterated over and over again, more of the surviving peppers will be hot,
because you've eliminated them. Not only the mild peppers themselves,
but even that genetic contribution within
the population that made the peppers hot. Now if we go back in time, that original
concept of natural selection was very intrinsically tied to that
of population growth. And Darwin's ideas were very much
influenced Malthus, who was an economist. Malthus had pointed out that
populations are actually kept from growing by limited food and resources, because again, our capacity
to breed to breed is very, very great. And if you provide more and
more food to a particular species, you'll tend to see that they will
reproduce at a higher rate than is needed just to recreate the number
of individuals present. That basically, the population will grow
if it is able to grow, almost always. Darwin pointed out that this limitation
produces struggle, wherein some subset that are better able to survive or
reproduce will tend to spread. But let's look at this concept
of population growth and why is it that natural populations grow so
much? Why do we see this potential for
great growth? Well the capacity for
growth is huge in most species out there. And imagine,
to maintain a constant population assuming the population was sexual, assuming
you need a pair of organisms to breed, each pair would only need to
produce two surviving offspring. Now, if conditions are favorable, how many
offspring can most individuals produce? We'll look at some plants, for example. Let's see that you're looking at seeds or
pollen. Here's a picture of a tulip stamen and
all the pollen on it. Look at all those individual
grains of pollen on there. How many possible offspring
could that tulip have? Definitely a lot more than two. Think about insect larvae,
if you let an insect breed, how many offspring can it have? Think about things like cane toad eggs. Cane toads as I mentioned a long time ago
are an invasive species in Australia and also in Hawaii. And they can have hundreds, thousands of
offspring just from one breeding pair. And it's even true for humans that if humans were allowed to
in some way, we could potentially. One couple could produce many, many, many
kids easily 10, 20 something like that. Now we like to model the rate of increase
and see how it's actually happening. Well populations can be modeled with what's referred to as
a stable rate of increase. This is assuming that a steady
fraction of the population, or the population increases by a steady
proportion year after year. To model this we need
a couple of parameters. We need a birth rate which
can be modeled as for example number of births
per thousand per year. We need a death rate, the number of
deaths per thousand individuals per year. And from this we can come up with what's
referred to as the intrinsic rate of increase of a population. That is very simply the birthrate, so the input minus the death rate which is
basically the output from the population. So in the United States as an example,
the birth rate is about 14 per 1000, the death rate is about 6 per 1000. So that makes the intrinsic
rate of increase about 0.008. In this case,
this is not considering immigration. This is just looking naturally. What this means is the population
will grow naturally by 0.8% per year. Now if the birth rate is greater than
the death rate, then the population grows. Conversely, if the birth rate
is lower than the death rate, then the population will decline. Now, so let's look at
the effect on population size. And we'll go through a little bit
of math here just to work this out. I hope you don't mind. So, let's say that n is the population
size and t is time in years. Now we can identify a standard rate
of population growth as dN over dt. Or change in population
size over change in time. And that would be equal to that rate
of increase times the population size. Now, if we wanted to get a algebraic
solution, if we assumed that this was a constant process,
we can approximate this as N sub t, so population size at time
t is equal to N sub zero which is that starting population size,
times e. E is the algebraic number you often see,
I think it's approximately 2.71. E to the power of rt, r being that
intrinsic rate of increase and t being time. So time may be measured in years. So, what is the population doubling time? How long does it take for a population to
double it's number of individuals, right? Obviously, that's going to be related to
R, it's going to be related to the rate of increase that if R is very large
the doubling time will be very short. If R is very, very small then
the doubling time would be very long, but let's put some actual numbers
on this just so you can see. So this is the formula
I showed you before. N sub t = N sub 0, e to the rt. And probably for this N sub t,
is the population size at time t, at the end of the period
that you're studying. What we want to solve for,
is we want to solve for the doubling time. The time it takes to go from
a particular population size, lets call it N sub 0 at the beginning,
to double that size. So, we're waiting for N sub 0 2N sub 0. So, what we can do, is we can basically solve this formula
by putting 2N sub 0 here for N sub t. Okay, and that what we're going to
do is we're going to solve for t. The idea here is to look at basically
how many generations it takes to go from N number of individuals to
2N number of individuals. So let's walk through. So we start off, as I said,
with substituting to this formula for N sub t we put 2N sub 0 and
we have 2N sub 0 = N sub 0 = e to the rt. Simple algebra,
we just divide those side by n sub zero so we have two = N to the rt. Now how do we solve for t with this? Because that's ultimately
what we are going for. What we have to do here is we
have to use the natural log. Remember, e is approximately
equal to 2.71, this is a factor that's used quite a bit. You have a button on your calculator
that probably says E to the X and another that says ln,
ln is the natural log. So what we do is we take
the natural log of both sides. Take the natural log of both sides. So we said natural log of 2, is equal
to the natural log of e to the r t. By the way, if you don't have a calculator
that does this, you can just go to Google and type in ln space 2, and
it'll actually solve that for you. So, we take the natural log of 2 and
that calculates out to 0.693. The natural log of e to
any power is that power. So in this case the natural
log e to the rt is rt. So we have now very simply 0.693 = rt. Now again, we're solving for
t, so what do we do? We divide both sides by r and there we go. The doubling time is now
t which is 0.693 / r. So, let's put some numbers into this. Well, we have a US population at the time
this was recorded of about 310 million. I mentioned before that the population
growth factor was about 0.008. So all we have to do is put in this
r into the formula right there. So 0.693 divided by 0.008 and
we have 86.6 years. Think about that, that is just a little
bit longer than the average life time. A lot of people live that long. And that is how long it would take until
the population of United States goes 310 million to 620 million people. That is a lot of people and
that's fairly quick. This is assuming this sort of growth as we
drew it here, but it's not unrealistic. Now let me get you to try one but I want
you to notice ahead of time that you don't actually need to know the population
size to get the doubling time. You basically don't need to
know this n sub 0 factor. All you need to know is r. Solomon Island, here are some
numbers I got from Wikipedia. The birth rate on Solomon Island
is about 35/1000. Death rate's about 5/1000. Population size today is about 500,000,
but you don't need to know that. How long would it take
to get to a million? How many years would it
take to get to a million? Well, I'll let you solve that
problem here on the question online. Well, I hope that one
wasn't too challenging. Very, very simple problem. What we want to do is,
is we want to calculate r. R as I mentioned before for is equal
to the birth rate minus the death rate. So it would be 35/1000- 5/1000 which is in this case
would come out to 0.03. So that's your r. So when we want to calculate
the doubling time, say doubling time in this
case t would equal to r or 0.693 divided by r, 0.03. So in this case comes out to 23 years. That's really dramatically fast isn't it? That's changing the population on these
island from 500,000 to a million. So you're doubling
the population size in 23 years. Well we've seen a lot of population
growth throughout the world and I'll show some pictures from
a recent article in science. This first figure shows historic and
projected future population growth. So you notice our world
population very slow, and we started seeing here very very recently
just in the last couple 100 years, this dramatic increase in
numbers of individuals. So we hit 1 billion in the year 1800,
we hit 3 billion in 1960, 4 billion in 1974, 5 billion in 1987,
6 billion in 1999, 7 billion in 2011, and it's projected
we'll hit 8 billion by 2024. This divides it up by some countries where
you're looking at some of the developed countries and less developed countries,
Africa as a continent, China by itself and India by itself. So this is projections up to 2050,
in this case, for world population growth. Now, interestingly, our rate of
population growth has actually gone down. Now we are still increasing. R is still positive. The birth rate is still
exceeding the death rate. But the amount with which it's
exceeding it has actually gone down over the last couple of years. But it's still positive and that's why we're continuing to
see this very rapid increase. Now this is something that several
different countries have attempted to address, one example would be China. China as many of you know back in
1979 instituted the One-Child policy, this shows you the population
growth in China over time. And this shows you the age
distribution as of 2009. And you may be thinking like
why is this still going right? Because we have the One-Child policy
instituted around 1979 1980, yet we still see this increase Increase. Interesting if you look at this, the increase is actually closer to
linear than it is to exponential. Like it's not going up,
it's not continuing to accelerate, as you would expect. So this probably has actually had some
effect on slowing population growth, but, again, the birth rate is
continuing to exceed the death rate. So we're still seeing an increase
in the population size in China, as in many other places in the world. Well, why is that? Well again,
we have two causes of population growth. There's high birth rate. And there's low death rate. So we can cut the birth rate,
but we still see growth. And what that means is
the death rate is decreasing faster than the birth rate is decreasing. Now that's not intrinsically a bad thing. Obviously, we like
decreasing our death rate. We don't want to have people
just die willy nilly of course. But this is a problem in terms of
how many people are on the planet. Over the course of many countries and
over the course of a lot of recent time, we've seen this declining mortality or
declining death rate. And some of it is associated with things
like introduction of the use of soap. Improved sanitation,
definitely things like antibiotics and other modern medicine have really
increase life expectancies. I can show you how much too. This is just showing the difference
between 1950 and 2010. Now look at this in Latin America and
the Caribbean. We have an increase in life
expectancy from 51 years to 73 years. In Africa from 38 to 55, North America 68 to 78 and
just over the course of the whole world there we can now live expect to live
20 years longer than we could before. And as a result of this we're seeing this
just increased life expectancy at birth. And this again,
divides it up by several countries. Now Again, intrinsically it's not
a bad thing that populations grow. However, there is some
maximum number of individuals that can be sustained on the planet. We'll come back to this
question in the next video. Thank you.