Hello, and welcome back to introduction
to genetics and evolution. In the previous video we talked about the
evolutionary advantages of recombination. In this video we're going to be looking
at something a little bit different. We want to look at how recombination
will affect patterns of neutral DNA sequence variation. DNA sequence variation
that may not matter in and of itself, but it is actually impacted
by say the spread of adapted variants. We'll look at two related concepts,
selective sweeps and hitchhiking, in this video. We left off the last video
by asking a question, how does recombination
affect molecular evolution? And we showed, in the previous video
that recombination can help combine good mutations and this is good for the
population because you don't have to wait for two beneficial mutations to arise
in the same genetic background. It also helps you get rid of bad
mutations from a population. It stops this process that we
refer to as molars ratchet which is the steady deterioration
of fitness in a population. As you accumulate more new mutations,
you can't get rid of them. Such that essentially you lose
the mutation free class and the population as a whole gets worse and
worse and worse. But again the question
we want to ask now is, how does recombination affect
variation in neutral sequences? Sequences that have no
direct effect on fitness. Well the first question we have
to ask before we ask that is, how do we quantify molecular
variation as a whole? So we have here nine
different sets of sequence. And these are potentially
from different individuals. So this could be from individual one,
two, three, four, five, etc. Well we look at this, and
most bases are the same. So the stretch of three Ts is
the same in all nine individuals. All right, we're assuming at this
point that you only have one copy, we're not looking at the two
copies that each individual have, but let's say we randomly selected
one copy from each individual. There are three sites that are variable. There's a site variable here,
here, and here. They're depicted in green. Is it sufficient to just to say there
are three variable sites out of however many there are here,
maybe about twenty or so? No, because you notice that
they're very different. So here at this first site, we have one individual who has a G but
everybody else has an A. So that's an example of a very
rare variant of that site. Here we have multiple
individuals who have a T, so a little bit less than half and
several have an A, and here it's very close to 50/50 and
there is four Ts and five Cs. So what we need to do is find some way
of capturing these relative abundances in our measure of how
much variation there is. So one commonly used metric for measuring
the amount of molecular variation in DNA sequences, when you have sequences from
many individuals, is referred to as pi. Okay?
Well, pi just very simply put is
the average number of pairwise mismatches among all
the sequences you have. This is analogous the 2pq idea that we used back when we were originally
studying Hardy Weinberg. It's kind of like the average
number of predicted heterozygotes. So let's look at these three
example sequences I have here. Between the first and second sequences,
how many mismatches are there? Well we can look very simply,
there is one here, one here, one here. Made it very easy by making them red? Well we have three mismatches between
the first and second sequence. What about between the second and third? Well, those same three positions
also differ between the second and third sequence. So there you go, we have another three. What about between the first and
third sequence? How many mismatches are there? Well, the only variable sites,
are the red ones. And, here they're the same. Here, they're the same. And, there they're the same. So, in fact, between the first and
third sequence, there are 0 mismatches. Now, pi is just the average
number of pairwise mismatches. So, we have, in this case,
3 numbers for mismatches, 3, 3, and 0. And we had three pairwise combinations,
so we just add these up and divide by the number of
pairwise combinations, which in this case was three,
we got three different comparisons. 3 + 3 = 6, 6 / 3 = 2. Now it's not very useful just to use
this two by itself because it could be two in 10 bases, two in 100 bases, two
in a 1000 bases, so typically when people talk about pi, they average out by
the number of sites being investigated. In this particular case we looked
across a stretch of 20 bases. So pi per site would be two
divided by the number of bases, which in this case was 20. So in this case, pi would be 0.1,
or simply put, 10%. Now pi is going to be much more affected
the more differences you have among sequences, so this is kind of interesting
in that if you have a very rare variance, it's not actually going to raise pi
all that much within a population. Whereas common variation if say
half the individuals have C, and half the individuals have T,
you have a lot more opportunities for pairwise mismatches. So pi per site is greater when there are
more bases differing among individuals. And pi is not as much affected
by very rare variants. Let's apply this and see what's happening
in terms of studying neutral sequences and spread of variation. So again, the question is, how do patterns of recombination
affect variation in neutral sequences? Now what happens,
although these particular sequences, or the variance that are found at
these sequences, may be neutral. There may be an occasional
beneficial mutation that arises. So what happens when you have
an occasional beneficial mutation? How does that affect the neutral
variation everywhere else? So sequences are not intrinsically
neutral, it just happens to be the variation that's present at
those sequences that is neutral. So let's assume a case where we
have no recombination whatsoever, we have this variation here
at base one is neutral. In this case now we have three Gs,
and about six As. At base two, we again have these As and
Ts, at base three we have Cs and Ts but we're assuming all this
variation is neutral. None of this is affecting fitness. Now, in this base four here, and
let's say that it's possible for there to be an adaptive
mutation at base four. And let's say here it is. So here this G that has arisen
by mutation is adaptive. Well if there's no recombination
across this entire stretch, what's going to happen? Well, since this G here is adaptive,
it's going to spread. And since there's no recombination, it's basically glued to
this whole set of sequence. So as this G spreads, so will this C,
so will this A, so will this A. Right, so
let's watch what happens over time. The G starts to spread. So G now is across half the population, guess we erased all the variation
in that half of the population. Those other three bases. As G spreads completely, we've lost
all variation not just at the adaptive site but at these three sites that
previously had neutral variation. Okay, notice this though, we had
the spread of an adaptive variant and we had a loss of variation
at these other three sites. And not only did we lose variation, but
we specifically carried this one variant, the C, the A and the A, from those three
sites, along with the spreading G. So what we witnessed is called hitchhiking
associated with a selective sweep. So, a selective sweep is
the spread of an advantageous allele through the population
by natural selection. It's what we expected from number four. Right?
That fourth base was the adaptive variant. And importantly, the loss of variation
associated with the sites near it. So, it's swept out all the variation
that was present there before. Hitchhiking is a related concept. This is the spread of nearby alleles
along with the advantageous variant because of linkage or
because of this lack of recombination. So in this case at SNPs one two and three
we had the A A anc C variants that all hitchhiked along with the spread of
that adaptive variant at base four. So the sweep there is what got
rid of all the old variation and hitchhiking is what happened in terms
of these particular three variants. Now this was the case when there
was no recombination whatsoever. What would happen if we actually said
there was lots of recombination among these sites, that they weren't all
glued together as one variant? Let's try that. So now, this is exactly the same
slide that we saw before. So what if there was lots of
recombination among these sites? Well, we might initially have, this
variant right here is going to spread. And it is in the very first generation
it is associated with this A, A and C at bases one, two and three. So, okay, it spreads a little bit. But now there's some opportunity. Let's say for example this one
has a kid with one of those. There's opportunity for
some recombination to happen. So, a heterozygous individual experiences
a cross over before making a gamete. So initially, we have this AAC associate
with the G but we have this other bit, we have this other haplotype GTT,
well what might happen is we might have a crossover just like
that which essentially puts this G and C next to a T and G over there,
producing this new gamete. You see this?
So this is something that was not found in the parentals, right? This is a recombinant, because the G and
C were previously together. The T and G were previously together, but this group was not previously
with this group, because you see, one of them came from this haplotype,
one came from that haplotype. So that get's moved into the egg. We now have a case where there's
the G adaptive variance associated with the T and G over there,
rather than just with the two As. Note the C there is still with
the G because it was a lot closer. So we might have you know more spread. So what's happened in this case? This is a little bit different now. We look here at base one. There's still some variation. We look here at base two,
there's still some variation. Base three actually has a little
variation, but it lost a lot of it. This one little T slipped in, but mostly
you lost a lot of the variation there. So, let's break this up. So, what happened with recombination? While the mutation at site four
still spread, that's very important, it's not that selection stops, selection
operated just the same as it did before. Recombination allowed SNPs one and two to
maintain actually most of their variation, that we still have two abundant
alleles at those two SNPs, right? So, the other alleles recombine onto the
chromosomes baring the sweeping allele at site four. So, pi was actually not reduced in that
left half of the picture that we just saw. SNP 3 had something that was kind
of intermediate between the two. At SNP 3 most of
the population got one allele. Right we had that one
variant that spread but there was a rare one
that there that didn't. So most of the chromosomes have the same
allele at SNP 3 after the sweep. So there was a loss of variation at SNP
3 but not to zero just lost some of it. And there was one particular allele that
became very common by hitchhiking, okay? So in this case, if you go back, let
me go back actually a couple of slides. So you go back here, looking at this. There is, if you split this in half, there is a big loss of variation
in this side of the picture. All right. Whereas there is basically no loss of
variation in this half of the picture. Okay? So pi is greatly reduced in the right
half unlike the left, and we did actually have a reduction variation at SNP 3 but we
did have hitchhiking still happen as well. So this is pretty cool, and this is
the kind of thing that we expect happens as we have the spread of adaptive
variants through human populations, or through populations of any species. Let me show you one hypothetical example. It's actually not hypothetical. It's a real example. This is looking at variation at
a single nucleotide polymorphism near the EPAS1 gene. Now this affects tolerance to low oxygen. So there were some interesting studies
looking at high-altitude Tibetan populations, and sure enough,
what it turns out, these are very high-altitude populations. This affects tolerance to low oxygen. There's evidence for a recent sweep and
hitchhiking in these Tibetan populations. If you look at a particular SNP, the A variance in Europe is at
a frequency of about 0.46, right? Now there is a mutation to tolerance for
low oxygen that arose in China. It arose on a chromosome
that had this A allele. So in these Tibetan populations,
we now see that A SNP frequency is 0.89. So this A SNP hitchhiked along with
the adaptive variant at EPAS1 and it's beneficial to have this new variance. So, this is something that's often
used a signature of natural selection. Now let me recap three principles here. First, adaptive alleles can sweep,
that means that they spread through the population and
they eliminate some variation nearby them. The second is that SNP and
or marker alleles, you know SNPs are markers,
that are near the adaptive allele. By near I mean that they
don't recombine away from it. And not necessarily referring
to physical distance, I'm more referring to
combinational distance. So basically if they have zero or low recombination from the adaptive
allele, they will tend to hitchhike, and pi will typically be reduced at
those SNPs or in those areas. In contrast, SNPs or marker alleles that
are far from an adaptive allele, so, in other words, that there's a lot
of recombination between them and the active allele, they do not hitchhike,
and pi is not typically reduced. You did not see the evidence
of a sweep in those cases. So, this is pretty cool and there's actually exercises to demonstrate
this if any of you are interested. This is actually one
developed by my laboratory. This is something where you can
essentially put this together in your lab. There's a paper on it in the journal
Evolution Education & Outreach by Heil et al. Heil is a PhD student of mine. Essentially you start this population
with a bunch of white eyed fruit flies. These white-eyed fruit flies are healthy. They're okay.
They're doing fine. We introduce a red-eye allele. That's actually the wild type allele. What ends up happening is after several
generations you see that most of the flies end up having red eyes because this
red-eye allele is advantageous. Now this bottom part shows
you a chromosome, so the eye color gene is on the x chromosome
and here's the red white eye color gene. Now you can do PCR or ways of assaying
two particular genetic markers. One of them's called near. One of them's called far. Near happens to be right
next to the eye color gene. Far is very far away. Now let me ask you in closing here,
what do you expect? Which of these two market alleles should
hitchhike along with the red eye variant? And then two related questions. Do we expect pi to be
reduced at the near region? And do we expect pi to be
reduced at the far region? So try those out, and
then check out the next videos. Thank you for your time.