Hello welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In this set of videos we've talked about
how natural selection is a mathematical inevitability. We've talked about how there's variation
in the acceptance of the truth of evolution across various countries,
and some of the reasons for that. We've talked a little bit about evidence
for evolution and common ancestor species. I'll recap that in just a second. So in this video I'd like to do is respond
to some of the criticisms of evolutionary theory that are leveled particularly
by the media and by non-scientists. So first, to recap, again some of
the points we've already raised, is we've seen examples of
natural selection in real time. I talked with you, for example,
about the case of the peppered moth, and the change in its color over time in Great
Britain and in other parts of the world. We've also seen the same sort of thing
with respect to antibiotic resistance in various bacteria. We've talked about extensive evidence for
evolution and common ancestry in the fossil record. We've talked about cases
of vestigial organs. These are organs which don't have
a function in present-day species, in the ones that you're looking at. However, other modern species or their ancestors presumably had
functions associated with this. We've talked about vestigial genes,
which are very similar to vestigial organs except we're just looking at
the genes producing these. We've talked about evidence from
biogeography, where animals live or where plants live being consistent with this
idea of common ancestry and evolution. And finally, I talked briefly about
a case of inefficient design. Something that, if you were to actually
design an animal from scratch, it wouldn't really make sense. However, when we consider
its ancestors and this working with the materials
available it made a lot more sense. So some of you may be thinking, well are there any observations that
actually would falsify evolution? The answer is yes, there are a few. So one of them would be
fossils in the wrong place. I mentioned to you before
the famous quote from J.B.S. Haldane about fossil rabbits
in the pre-Cambrian which would certainly falsify the truth of
evolution and common ancestry of species. Mammals in Devonian would do the same. Adaptations in one species that
are only good for a second species. That would definitely not be consistent
with the idea of evolution by natural selection. Adaptations that could not have
evolved in a step-by-step process, those are things that again would
be very difficult to reconcile with evolution by natural selection. And I'll show you a proposed case
of that in just a second and show you why it's not the case. Evolved altruistic behaviors
among non-relatives, and animals that don't
exhibit social behavior. Again, that would be a challenge for
evolution by natural selection. And last but not least,
any sort of discords, any disagreement between relationships, or phylogenies inferred using DNA versus
inferred using morphology and fossil. Again, we don't really see those,
but those are observations that could in theory falsify common ancestry,
or evolution by natural selection. So, let's talk about what some of the
common criticisms are that are level with the media, and this is particularly
true in the United States. First, is there's been too much change for
evolution to explain. You frequently hear people say I'm
perfectly okay with microevolution, change within a species, small bits of change
like the color in the peppered moth. But common ancestry, we have a common ancestry with bacteria or
amoebae or plants. No way. There's just too much change. We'll talk about this in a second. You can't explain the complexity we see, so one example you frequently
hear is that of the eye. The eye is too complex and
half an eye doesn't work. Well that's true, half an eye doesnt'
work but that's not how evolution would have made the eye, wouldn't have made
one half and then the other half. [LAUGH] One that's come up is
why is it still happening. So, Republican Strategist
Christine O'Donnell, here, in the United States said, why
are monkey's still evolving into humans? We don't see these half-human,
half-monkey's out there, obviously. Yeah, we'll come back to that. And, last but not least, it doesn't explain life's origin or
denies the existence of God. We'll come back to each of these points. So first, let's talk about
the too much change argument. Now it's very difficult to conceive of time in the context
of the age of the Earth. And I think this is where
the challenge comes in and when people say there's
been too much change. There's no way we could
have that much change. Well let's look at some things where we
do know the history of what's happened. So let's look at dogs. Dogs experienced artificial selection
through our human breeding. There's no fundamental
difference genetically, in terms of what happens with artificial
selection versus the actual selection. There's just one case when we apply it,
there's another case where the environment applies it with
competition or something like that. Dogs were domesticated only
a few thousand years ago. Okay, so
this is not a very long period of time. The breeds that we in fact see today,
so things like great danes, chihuahua, collies, all those great things, most of
those are only a few hundred years old. Yet we see striking diversity. We actually see different forms,
as you see from this picture here. There are forms that look like
they barely could even interbreed. They don't even necessarily
look like the same species. So this is a fairly dramatic change in
over the course of a few hundred years. Now, how old is the Earth? Well, the Earth is like
5 billion years but life has been on Earth for
an estimated 3.5 billion years. Well it's hard to relate to this number. Like if I tell you something like
something happened 3,000 years ago you say, okay, that was a long time ago. If I say something happened 3
billion years ago you say, okay, that was a long time ago. But it's hard to relate to the difference
in scale there between those two things cuz it's so
much longer than human lifetimes. So let me put this in sort of a scale
that we actually can relate to. How many times over could
dog breeds have evolved? How many times over and
over again could dog breeds have evolved? Well, if 1,000 years were a millimeter, 3.5 billion years would be 3.5 kilometers. So, look at something, I pull up
a ruler for a second and look at it. And you'll see, okay, that's 1 millimeter,
so that would've been dog breed. That would have been all the dog breeds. Do that over and over again for
every millimeter and do that until you've gone 3.5
kilometers down the road. [LAUGH] That's a very,
very, very long time. You could've evolved dog breeds over and
over again many, many, many times. So just to give you some scale,
here's Manhattan, one of the boroughs of New York. There's 3.5 kilometers. Imagine counting that off,
a millimeter at a time. So really, I think the issue is we can't
conceive of the scale of time, and that's why people are very unwilling to
accept the idea that you could get so much change, because they just can't conceive
of the scale that we're talking about. Another criticism is this
idea of too much complexity. And we often hear those things that say, we often hear people say well that
we don't see intermediates to eyes. Well in fact, even the single-celled organism like
the Euglena has an eyespot photoreceptor. A simple photoreceptor is probably what was the first step into evolving
what we see as the modern eye. The figure I show here on the slide
depicts a series of events starting with a simple photoreceptor with a nerve
associated with it up to the modern eye. And this is very, very easy to
conceive of as having happened. So this shows you how something as complex
as the eye could evolve through these simple steps not involving a half eye or
anything ridiculous like that. So, let's talk briefly about
why isn't this still happening. Well, there's a lot of incorrect
assumptions with this argument. First, one of the assumptions is
the formation of new species means the old species will be gone. That's absolutely not true. The second is this presumed
directionality revolution. Why should monkeys still
be evolving into humans? There's a lot of problems with this. Let's go into several of them. First, new forms may be advantageous
because they're exploring different resources. So I have here a picture of
several of Darwin's finches. These are some of the finches that
inspired Darwin to write his theory. The top one here,
top left one is geospiza magnirostris. It's a woody seed-eater
among other things. The one next to it is a cactus-eater,
below it's an insect-eater, below that is a grub-eater. So we see these different
forms are exploiting all sorts of different resources. Now, presumably there are some ancient
fish which actually got to the Galápagos and diversified in all
these different forms. But it's advantageous to go into
all these different new resources. So it helps to have all the forms, right? There's an advantage to each of them,
okay? So it's advantageous because they can't
exploit these distinct resources. The other thing as I mentioned is
there's no directionality of evolution. History may not repeat itself. The late Stephen Jay Gould often used
the analogy saying if you were to rewind the tape of life and play it again
would it actually unfold the same way? The answer is it may or may not. In a lot of cases it may not,
we may get something completely different. But there's a very crucial point, with particularly with respect to
this idea of man from monkeys. And that is humans did not
evolve from chimpanzees or anything else that is currently alive. Instead, this is a very important point,
humans and all these other species
share a common ancestor. When we go back in time,
there was a common ancestor and we have these modern
species coming from it. All species, even single-celled ones,
have changed over time. They have evolved over time. The amoeba has evolved over just
as much time as the humans have. Just because, if you go all the way back,
we share that single same common ancestor. So, there are no higher beings. This is a misrepresentation to think of
it as we are higher and they are lower. There are definitely cases of
simpler versus more complex, but there's no higher versus lower. There's no more evolved
versus less evolved, because the timeframe is the same. So, the last thing I wanna touch on very
briefly, cuz this comes up a lot, this idea that evolution doesn't explain life's
origin or denies the existence of God. Now, the first point is somewhat true,
that when we look at most evolutionary theory and most of the things
we'll be talking about in this course. Don't attempt to address how or
why life arose. We're talking about how it's changed over
time from the original life forms or from later life forms to
modern day life forms. So that's not something looking
at that original origin of life. There are people who do try
to understand that, but that's not where most
evolutionary theory comes in. That doesn't mean it's bad or mistaken. It's just that's not
what we're focusing on. The second part is untrue. There's now intrinsic theism or
atheism to anything we've discussed, or to anything about evolution. As you've seen before with the example
I gave you with the squirrels and natural selection,
it's a mathematical inevitability. It's only explaining what's happened. And it's not saying anything about
there is a God, there's not a God. And in fact, there are some biologists
who support evolution who are also very devout in their faith. So one example being Francis Collins, who's the Director of the National
Institutes of Health in the United States. Some of them in contrast
are very devout atheists, such as Richard Dawkins who's
very outspoken about his atheism. There's nothing within evolutionary theory
that speaks whatsoever to this idea of God or not God. There's nothing in that. And I will point out,
there are some faiths, however, that are adversarial towards evolution,
where there are dogmas which come out saying that, no, man was created in
its modern form, things like that. That is not an issue with evolution. That is an issue with the faith
failing to accept it. So it's using arguments
outside the realm of science. So it's up to you how you
wish to evaluate those. But if you want some other
materials to look at, I encourage you to see an interview
with Jerry Coyne, which is found online. He's the author of the book
Why Evolution is True. He's a very outspoken advocate for
evolution and very eloquent in the way
he presents things. So I encourage you to look at that and
I hope you've enjoyed these videos so far. Thank you.