Hello, and welcome back to introduction
to genetics and evolution. In the previous video we talked
about looking for evidence for natural selection at individual genes. And try to focus on differences
say between humans and chimps. And infer whether these differences
that we see may have been the result in part from the action of natural
selection versus genetic drift. dN/dS test is useful in this regard. This is looking at the number
of non-synonymous changes, per non-synonymous site, divided by
synonymous changes per synonymous site. The advantage of scaling
the synonymous changes, is these are expected to be neutral. Whereas the non-synonymous changes
may be advantageous, may be neutral, may be detrimental. The problem though is
the dN/dS can sometimes mix up constraint with adaptive evolution and
just call it neutral. So this is a little bit of a challenge and
dN/dS is generally believed to be fairly conservative when looking for
adaptive amino-acid. When I say conservative I mean
there's too many false negatives. There's too many times when you fail to
see positive selection that actually has potentially operated in the evolutionary
history of a particular gene. Now we can leverage some aspect of neutral
theory that we haven't talked about yet. And that is that we predict the ratio
of nonsynonymous to synonymous changes should be roughly constant through time,
right? The ratio that you see among
individuals within species should be roughly similar to
the ratio you see between species. You may be wondering,
why should this be constant through time? Well, there's an assumption about the
neutral theory that most non-deleterious, non-synonymous mutations are neutral. Basically, those mutations that you see
within a species that are just segregating around, they are at some frequency,
those tend to be neutral, because the bad ones are eliminated,
and the advantageous ones spread. So you tend to see a lot of these. So these non-deleterious, nonsynonymous mutations will
behave like synonymous mutations. And they'll rise at some
sort of constant rate. And they'll fix with about the same
probability as a synonymous change. This idea of the allele
frequency should predict 1/(2N). Now two fellows, John McDonald and
Marty Kreitman, suggested this test, which has subsequently
been named after them. They didn't call it the McDonald-Kreitman
test, they just named it a test. Now they proposed that you can test for
a selection by seeing if this ratio is constant within species and
between species. The importance here is this within
species is looking at the present day, we're taking a snapshot of
a population right now. What do we see in terms of nonsynonymous
variation, synonymous variation? The between species indicates
historical changes, what's happened over
the evolutionary history. So what they do is,
they align sets of sequences, and identify their variable nucleotide sites. They basically just have
this four cell test, where they identify each difference as
a nonsynonymous difference within species, a synonymous difference within species, a
nonsynonymous difference between species, or a synonymous difference. So let's try this, that was a lot
of words, let's try it in practice. So here we have an example, let's say that
we have four individuals in species one, and one individual in species two. For the sake of argument,
let's say species one are humans and species two are chimps. Now here's our code on table again and
what we're looking for are these two parallel categories. First, what is fixed between, so these
are differences between species one and species two. We have polymorphism within, so basically what is variable within,
in this case species one, and then we can also categorize any of these
differences as being nonsynonymous or amino acid changing, or
synonymous where they don't change. So what we do is we just walk through. In this case we're not looking for a site,
we're actually just looking for overall. So where are the differences
between species here? Well, here is a difference,
within or between species. So there's a difference
here between species, this is within species, this is between
species, this is within species. This is within species. So we have an amalgam here, we have
some within species difference, and some between species difference, okay? Now let's walk through them. So this first site here, this is a
non-synonymous change as you can see here, CT anything to ATG, which is Methionine. That is a non-synonymous difference and this is a non-synonymous
difference between species. So that goes in this cell. We skip this one because
we're not going per site, we're just gonna skip the next one and
go to the third nucleotide site. In this case we have a difference within
species, but they all are making Leucine. So it's polymorphic within, all right? And synonymous. So let's jump now over a little bit. This one right here is a difference
between species, but again AC anything is Threonine so this is a synonymous but
between species difference. Jump over a little bit this is
a within species difference but second position,
second position is always non synonymous. So it should be nonsynonymous within and the last one over here, ACC or
ACA those are both threornines. So there should be another polymorphic
within species because the variation is just in species one, species two has
one of the ones from species one and is synonymous. So we basically tally these things up and
we have these four numbers that come out, we'll just call them A, B, C,
and D for the sake of argument. If all nonsynonymous
differences are neutral, then we expect A/C, this ratio you see between species,
is essentially reflecting the historical, should be equal to the ratio B/D, what you
see within species, or the present day. In contrast if some, or especially
if there's a lot of non-synonomous differences between species
that were advantageous and selected, like let's say
something helped us humans be able to digest things that
are unique to our diet better. Then this ratio should be greater
than this ratio, that the AC > B/D. What's happened then is these difference
will have spread within humans. They're changing the amino acid ratio. Since they spread within humans,
they're now a between-species difference. They're not something that's neutral
that's just kind of hanging out in the population, okay. So let's look at a couple of examples. Here's some actual data from a few genes. Here's SEMP1, that enables cellular
survival under low oxygen. This is a case where we see a large
difference in terms of nonsynomis or synomis between species
relative to within species. This would be a good candidate for
positive selection. There's been some sort of adaptive
difference between humans and chimps. In contrast, this one CIAS1, which
affects an auto-inflammatory response, that one is pretty
similar between the two. So, this is a case where
we can't reject neutrality. The ratio here, five tenths,
is equal to one half. Now what about the opposite? This is what we haven't talked about. What happens when,
instead of being greater between species, or equal,
what happens if it's the other way? So here's the gene AGT. The mutations in AGT affect hypertension,
associated with coronary artery disease. What happens if you have a high number of
non-synonymous differences among humans? A higher ration non-synonymous
difference among humans, than between humans and chimps? What do you think that might mean? So now we have to think about what
kind of variation would do this. So what kind of variation persists for
a long time, but doesn't fix? Well the answer in this case,
Is unfit recessive alleles. So let me show you a picture, and
this is a picture you saw before. Let's say over here on the x
axis is time and generations. On the y axis is allele frequency. Now, let's imagine hypothetically that you
had an allele that was actually bad, but it was recessive. What you might see is you might see
something that looks like this. We saw this, actually, in previous videos, when we talked about the action on
the actual selection, that it's actually kind of hard to completely get
rid of these recessive bad alleles. These bad alleles can stick around for a
long time, because what's happening here, let's say, for example, the bad one is aa. And then the good ones are AA and
Aa, right. What happens is it gets very rare, almost all of the little as
are present in the heterozygous form. So they're basically masked and selection
doesn't get rid of them very well. Only the very small number of aa
are actually being eliminated by natural selection. So the better dominant allele
never quite gets to fixation. Now a lot of diseases, as I mentioned
way back when, tend to be recessive. And as a result these mutations
causing disease will stick around within populations but never fix,
and they eventually do get lost, but it takes a very long time for
them to get lost. So this is a variation that you'll see
that will stick around within the species and it effects the within
the species numbers, but does not effect
the between species numbers. And these diseases will tend to
be associated with non synonymous bad variations, so
this is what causes that. Essentially, here's the ratios
again we talked about, between species nonsynonymous over
synonymous versus within species nonsynonymous over synonymous. That if all nonsynonymous
differences were neutral we expect these ratios to be similar. If some of these nonsynonymous differences
were advantageously selected then we expect this ratio, A/C > B/D. Right, because the advantageous
ones would spread, they would come between species
non-synonymous variation. In contrast, if you have maladaptive
non-synonymous differences, they will persist within species and never be converted to between
the species differences. In that case A/C < B/D. The that's what will happen if you
have diseases lingering around. So looking at the McDonald Kreitman
test we have this A/C = B/D. That's a case where you
can't reject neutrality. Again, it doesn't mean it's neutral,
it can be a mix, but you can't reject it. If A/C is greater than B/D, then we have increased non
synonymous changes between species. We have more non synonymous changes than
we expected between species relative to within And that is indicative of positive
selection or advantageous variation. So you're running. In contrast, if A/C is less than B/D then
you have decreased nonsynonymous changes between species. What that means is you have some variation
that's lingering within species and doesn't quite get fixed. That is often the result
of negative selection. There are other possibilities, things like
overdominance that we talked about earlier will also do this same sort of pattern. But it's thought that over dominance
is not especially common, so a lot of this is going to be in
the boat of negatives selection or bad variations sticking around. So what happens when
we look at the genome? I showed you a couple of examples. This is looking at a lot
of genes studied across or the difference between humans and chimps. The blue marked genes are ones that have McDonald-Kreitman tests results
indicative of positive selection. The red ones are indicative
of negative selection. You notice there's a lot more
red out there than blue. But again,
we know that most mutations are bad. We know that most bad mutations
are recessive, therefore, it's gonna make it so
they're just kind of lingering around. So instead of just looking at this figure,
let me give you some of the numbers. The positively selected genes from that
particular study I was just showing you, there are about 304. Again, what are they associated with? The same sorts of things as the high
dN/dS values, immunity protein genes, gamete formation ones,
also some for sensory perception. In terms of negatively selected ones,
many of these are involved in cytoskeleton formation and they're often associated
with diseases like, muscular dystrophy, cardiovascular disease, etc. So let me give you one to try here, so you
can have a little bit of practice within the video before you even try
any of the practice problems. So this is a hypothetical sequence for
arsD. This is something that controls
arsenic resistance, okay? So I want you to go through here and
calculate and interpret the McDonald-Kreitman test. So, you may want to pause the video before
you actually get to the in-video quiz. Yep.
I hope that wasn't too difficult for you. Let's go ahead and take a look. So what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna
highlight things in blue and red first. So the blue ones here are indicating
differences between species, so this is comparing humans to chimps. The blue ones are indicating
differences between species. The red are indicating sites that
are variable within species, to make it a little bit easier to see. So let's look at those. We're looking at between species. We have one non-synonymous difference,
that's this one right here, this is non-synonymous. And we have two synonymous
differences between species. All right, so
this is a synonymous difference here, and synonymous difference here. When looking within species,
what do we see? We have two nonsynonymous. This one is nonsynonymous. Remember, always the second
side's nonsynonymous. This one's also nonsynonymous. And this one right here is synonymous. So one synonymous within so
our ratio's 1:2 versus 2:1. So again, which one is bigger? And of course we see it's bigger
in the within species category, that this is a result in
the direction of negative selection. That there is potential bad variation
sticking around within species and not being eliminated. So let's recap real quickly,
here's the McDonald-Kreitman test. Again if A/C, A being the between
species nonsynonymous divided by between species synonymous for C is equal to B/D,
the same for within species, you can't reject neutrality,
does not mean that it is neutral. If it greater between species
than within species, then you have increased nonsynonymous changes, that
interesting positive selection, right. In you have A/C < B/D, you have decreased, you have been holding back
the nonsynonymous changes. They're staying within species and not
converting to differences between them. That is negative selection. Now I've shown the dN/dS test and I've shown you the McDonald-Kreitman test,
there are other metrics out there. There are many that also exist
that we won't use in class, the one popular one is
referred to as Tajima's D. That uses the frequencies of alleles
to test for recent selection or recent changes in
population size in example. But importantly these are implemented
to understand what's going on. There's two general approaches for study. One is to scan the whole genome
using these metrics and look for possible selection and
then try to interpret it. All right, so
that's like the picture I showed you. They're showing all the red and
blue labelled genes. That's where we look at everything and
try to interpret how much positive selection versus
negative selection in the genome. The other is the look at candidate genes, to pick out the subset of genes
that you know effect brain size or effect speech and look for
the signatures of the selection of those. Or maybe even individual genes. Now, both of these are active
areas of research. And both of them have given us some
clues as to what's been important in our divergence or the divergence of any
other species that have been studied. So closing out, what makes humans special? Well, these DNA sequence-based tests have
shown that, again, hundreds of genes have undergone selection to change, and a lot
of that seems to be, when I say selection to change, I'm referring to this positive
selection, this adaptive variance. More genes are under some
selection to stay the same. Nonsynonymous changes are bad,
and therefore they're held back. They don't ever become
differences between species, but may linger as differences within species. Therefore some of these bad alleles are
sticking around, and this also makes it so a lot of our sequence is a lot
more similar chimpanzee, than if we were evolving purely neutrally. But importantly, and
let me just close with this, there's no single gene change
that made us what we are today. Yet, we're not as
different from chimpanzees, genetically, as we might like to think. Well, I hope you found this interesting. Thank you for joining.