Hello, and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. We've been looking at the process of
speciation, or species formation. Now, speciation is what leads to this
diversity that we have on the planet, in terms of all the species that we see. In the last video, we tried to understand
where did all these species come from and why don't they fuse with each other? Where do these clusters come from? We talked about the importance
of these barrier traits. These are traits that prevent gene
exchange between existing species. And those are what basically keep
one species distinct from another. In this video,
we'll look at the effects of geography and how that affects species formation. But the reason we're interested
in geography is, we wanna know, more fundamentally,
what makes new species evolve. And we wanna understand
the evolutionary processes involved. So what we're looking at happening here
is the formation of barrier traits. When you have a barrier trait evolve,
it separates one group from another group, you have a new species. Because you've cordoned off some or
all of the genome from gene exchange. Again, you can have a little
bit of gene flow and still be considered a separate species. Okay. A little bit of gene flow
between the two types and still be considered a separate species. Again, we're interested in
the evolutionary processes. We're interested in the relative roles of,
for example, random or stochastic processes. What is the importance of,
for example, genetic drift? What is the importance of mutations
that just happened to arise in one group that didn't
arise in another group? Those would just be random. We're also interested in the different
types of roles that natural selection can have. So natural selection can act directly
on traits to prevent gene flow. So for example, natural selection may
directly favor a behavioral preference. And we will look at
an example of that later. Or, natural selection may
act more incidentally in the context of making these traits. It may be that it's beneficial for
individuals in one particular population to forage in the tops of trees,
and after they've done this for a while, they have a preference for
foraging in the tops of trees. And then when they come back with their
ancestors that foraged on the bottom, they just don't encounter each other. That would be more incidental. Now, we'll look at each of these
in the context of these models of species formation. The first model we'll look at is often
referred to as allopatric speciation. And that is speciation
involving geographic isolation. So, I have here just four
steps diagrammed out. You imagine you start off with one single
population that's fully interbreeding. And maybe something happens over time,
maybe a stream evolves that separates the population into two sub-populations,
or perhaps a mountain range. Over time changes may happen,
such that this group evolves in one way, this group evolves in another way. But again, there's no
interbreeding between the top and bottom group because of this barrier. It's not because of
anything intrinsic to them. And then after a long time when they come
back together, they've happen to have changed enough that they don't interbreed
or don't produce fertile offspring. So the big question is,
what made these changes happen? What was happening in this period where
one was on one side of the stream, one was happening on
the other side of the stream? Well there are many possibilities. You may have had new random mutations that
arose in one side that didn't arise in the other, and they spread, and
then they fixed, eventually. You may have the abundance of gene forms,
or alleles, just change
randomly on two sides. Basically you have genetic drift. The other possibility was the environment
was different on two sides. Maybe one environment they're selected for tolerance to a particular chemical, or
tolerance to heat, something like that. And eventually, as a result of that, different alleles were
favored by natural selection. But in all these cases,
we did not have selection for the barrier effect specifically. The barrier effect was
an outcome of random or selective processes, but
it was not directly selected. Because they didn't encounter
each other at the time, so there couldn't have been selection
to avoid mating with those species since they never encountered
the other population at all. So, the concept that's important here
is that gene flow is the homogenizing force in evolution. So if you cut off gene flow for
a very long period of time, then it's easy to diverge into
two differentiated populations. That's the fundamental basic
principle to allopatric speciation. There's a lot of evidence for this. One line of evidence is we tend to see that species boundaries are associated
with geographic barriers. So, you'll see a lot of different species
have the same species boundaries. So, Point Conception is a place
along the coast of California. That's an area where there are 21
species of snails, algae, and barnacles, that have ranges ending here, and that
have a close relative on the other side. So there is 21 species on this side, 21 species on the that side, and the
closest relatives are on the other side. It suggests that there is
some sort of break here, there is some sort of current or
something that makes it so there is an absence of gene flow that
allowed these forms to separate. There have also been experimental studies
trying to recapture this allopatric speciation process. There is a famous one from Dodd from
1989 that did a selection experiment. So, she started off with
a single species of fruit flies, it is actually Drosophila pseudoobscura,
the ones I mentioned earlier. One group was fed starch based food for
many generations, the other group was fed a different sort of sugar,
a multos-based food for many generations. So after eight generations when
she brought them back together, it turned out that the ones
that bred on starch tended to prefer to breed with
others that bred on starch. The ones that bred on maltose
tended to prefer to breed with others that bred on maltose. It wasn't a perfect preference, but there was definitely a preference
that was observable, in that regard. So just by virtue of some incidental
selection to preferring maltose food, or consuming maltose food or consuming starch food,
we had this behavioral preference evolve. So that's kinda cool. That was a simple model
of allopatric speciation. Let me give you, now,
allopatric speciation with a little twist. This is a case where we have
geographic isolation but you actually regain contact
before speciation is complete. This case again you are starting off
with one population just like before, you're separated by your stream
just like before, changes happen. So you have this start of evolving a new
species, but in this case, before they are all the way at good species, they
actually start to encounter each other. So that they're somewhat different but
they're not completely different, and we have for some reason continued divergence
and the formation of barrier traits. Now this is related to
the concept of reinforcement. Now reinforcement comes from this
idea that hybridization is bad, right, that anything that facilitates
organisms passing on their genes would be favored by natural selection. Of course, right, it's always good to have
as much of passing on your genes as much as possible in terms of fitness. Now, species hybrids are very often
sterile or have somehow reduced fitness. This may be true in this beginning of
evolution, that maybe the hybrids aren't completely sterile, but they're a little
bit more sickly than within species types. As a result of this,
producing sterile hybrids is costly. If the hybrids are sterile, the producing is costly because you're
not passing on your genes any further and you're wasting gametes and
parental efforts in producing these. If hybridization is bad,
then we predict alleles that prevent or reduce mating with the other species
will be favored by natural selection. Because they will reduce
this bad hybridization. Essentially if you mate
with your own type, you will produce offspring
that is fertile and viable. If you mate at random, then you'll produce
some sterile or less-fit offspring. Therefore, there's a preference for,
or there's selection favoring alleles that will make it so that you
preferentially mate with your own type. So this selection will only
operate in populations where you can mate with the other species. If there's no choice but your own species present,
then there's no selection for that. So we predict that this reinforcing
selection should only operate in populations where you can
mate with the other species. Well this relates actually
to my dissertation study. If you go back to 1995,
that's me in 1995, with more hair. I worked again on Drosophila
pseudoobscura persimilis. Just to recap,
these species look exactly alike. The hybrid males of
the species are sterile, so there's definitely a cost to mating with
the other species, because half your kids are sterile and they are bad at
passing on genes, of course. Hybrid females are fertile, right. So there's some conduit for
potential gene exchange. They do mate in nature, but not very much
and they're native to North America. Let me show you their ranges. This shows you the range of drosophila
pseudoobscura and persimilis. The yellow indicates where
pseudoobscura's found by itself. The red indicates where both
pseudoobscura and persimilis are found. Now if hybridization is bad,
if you're having selection favoring better discrimination against mating with
the other species, would that selection operate on drosophila pseudoobscura
here in the yellow population? Would there be selection there to
preferentially mate with your own type? Or would there be selection here in the
red population to preferentially mate with your own type? Think about that for a minute and
try this in video quiz. I think that was pretty easy. At least I hope you
found that pretty easy. The basic question here is where is there
going to be selection to preferentially mate with your own type? What happens, I have brought flies from
these populations back to the lab, and what I found is that when we look at
drosophila pseudoobscura from yellow, they showed very low discrimination. They would mate with
persimilis pretty easily. When I drosophila pseudoobscura from
the red populations they had very high discrimination. They were very reluctant to mate
with drosophila persimilis. So this is consistent with this idea
of reinforcement, that selection directly favors a behavioral preference
and this is just one example. There's actually evidence from
a lot of other species as well, that if you look at these species. These are fly catchers
form genus Ficedula. There's differences in sexually preferred
characters in areas where the species overlap versus where they're found alone. Then if you look at, Ficedula hypoleuca
and Ficedula albicollis, they basically look very similar in populations
where each one is found by itself. In contrast, when you look in populations
where they're found together, hypoleuca has a much
more brown appearance. So again,
they've adopted this different look through the sexual selection pressure. And generally speaking,
this is another one species example. Generally speaking,
they do surveys across species, you tend to find that co-occurring
species show higher mating discrimination than geographically separated ones
when brought together in the lab. So this is looking at variation
among species rather than variation within species. So this all lends credence to this
idea there can be selection for stopping mating with the other species. Now what traits can be selected? Now habitat differences between species
can prevent making bad hybrids. Timing differences between species
can prevent making bad hybrids. Mate preference differences between
species can prevent making bad hybrids. But let me ask you this. Can you have selection for
hybrid sterility? Well, think about that for just a second. Does that actually prevent
you from making bad hybrids? Well, that was a pretty easy question for
you. In fact, the answer is no,
hybrid sterility is too late, you've already made the bad hybrid. So it doesn't actually help you
to ever have hybrid sterility. In fact, there's almost no circumstance
that you can find where you can actually have natural selection favoring
making sterile hybrids. Whereas you can have natural
selection favoring all those things that prevent interbreeding. The last model I
introduced to you briefly, this is a case where you have
no geographic isolation. This is often referred to
as sympatric speciation. So, you start with one population,
no stream or anything but you just have partitioning
into distinct types. Interbreeding is reduced, and
they continue to form and eventually become separate species. This probably requires very
strong natural selection. Imagine if you had distinct niches. And imagine, in the course of
adapting to these distinct niches, it makes it such that if you actually
are intermediate in some sort of form. If you're not adapted to niche one,
if you're not adapted to niche two, you're actually bad in both. Or if you're a frequent switcher,
you're actually bad in both. That would make a situation where you
could potentially have this sort of split happen. But there are trade-offs associated with
adaptation to niche one versus niche two. Now there is some evidence for
sympatric speciation. It's not very common but it might
happen at some frequency out there. Probably the best example is that
of the Crater Lake cichlids. These are ones that have shown
distinct habitat adaptations. They have diversified in their feeding
apparatus, as you see over here. And they have diversified
in color patterns. So we actually see behavioral
preferences associated with those. With these crater lakes now, they are open where individuals can
swim from one niche to another. So there are niches there. The nearest relatives are nearby. But we've had this diversification
in deforms just in one area. Now, there's probably not
a single answer out there, there's probably diversity of answers
to these but looking at the things that I raised, you can have natural
selection incidentally cause new species. We saw that in the allopatric example,
especially that artificial one that I mentioned with the starch and
maltose foods. You can have natural selection directly
drive or help formation of a new species. That's what you tend to see in
the context of reinforcement. Random processes almost
certainly can contribute. The big question, and this is
the kind of thing a lot of speciation researchers struggle with, is how
often do each of these things happen? And I mentioned for
example that sympatric speciation is rare. You've probably can find a biologist
out there who might say it's actually quite common. We don't know. The real answer is we don't actually know. It just seems like it should be hard but we don't really know because
it's hard to test these. So just a recap, from geographic patterns
we can sometimes infer the evolutionary processes that drove these splits. That we have evidence for
diverse modes of species formation. So we have evidence for
allopatric speciation. We have evidence for reinforcement. We have a little bit of evidence
of sympatric speciation. And these suggest there are diverse
roles for natural selection and random processes. And finally,
the big question now is the relative frequency that all these things happen. So, we shall see. Thank you very much.