Hello, and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In the previous video we talked about how
a greater variance in mating success for males made it so sexual selection was typically more
intense on males than on females. That, typically speaking,
in many animal species, or at least in a stereotyped animal species,
each female would be mated, but there would be this tons of variance
where a lot of males never mate and a couple of males were very,
very successful at mating. So what this did is it
created an opportunity for two different forms of sexual selection,
both of which were recognized by Darwin. That of competition among males and
that for choice by females for
particular kinds of males. So let's look at each of these in turn. Let's start with male competition. So how is it that males compete amongst
each other for access to females? Well, I'll talk about three brief types. One is direct combat and things related
to that such as forming hierarchies. The second being territoriality. And the last looking at particular
strategies males can employ. It may be being sneaky in some
ways to get access to females. Now the most obvious
form of sexual selection is direct combat amongst males, right? Or, now essentially it's not uncommon for
males to battle for access to females. In fact we know this from
our own cultural references. Maybe you're familiar with
the story of Helen of Troy. That's a classic example of a very
long battle among males for access to a particular female. But we see this in all sorts
of other species as well. Insects, birds, and other mammals etc. Now these battles, although not uncommon,
tend to be very costly. It's not good for you to injure
yourself in the process of trying to stake a claim for a female or
a set of females. So what a lot of animals have
done to compensate for this. Again, not thinking this through but
just evolutionarily this has happened, is they compete without actually
fighting to the death or damage. They have these sorts of displays. And then if it looks like this
animal is stronger than that animal, based on this communication
signal display, the other one backs off and says,
all right, fine, you've won. Now related to this, a lot of social species establish what's
referred to as dominance hierarchies. Now this is very different from
the genetic dominance we talked about. In this case we are talking
about behavioral dominance. And basically somebody is the alpha male. Somebody is the top dog among this group. So if you have a set of males,
there is one who is clearly recognized as being the top, another one may
be recognized as being second, etc. Now what may happen is the top male that
has access to whatever female he wants, he will frequently be challenged
by these other males. They'll have these fights sometimes, maybe suggesting some
reordering of the hierarchy. But by and large everybody
acknowledges this is the top male. There's advantages to this, because,
again, you're not fighting to the death, you're not having this sort of
frequent injury and things like that. By having this hierarchy exist, everybody
just knows what's supposed to happen. Now, a related thing, or alternative
to combat dominance is to delineate and defend a particular territory. In this case, males will try to keep
other males away from their mates or their resources. And then they do this, they may try
to signal others to say away through vocalizing as you can see this bird is
doing here as well as this elephant seal. We talked about the elephant seal
extensively in the last video. They may make other sorts of visual
displays to fend off any other males. They may even have scent marking. We'll talk about another
one in just a second. These sorts of delineations aren't
just to keep away other males, but they may also be to attract the females. Hey look, I'm a strong guy. I've got this great territory. Come on over here. Importantly, these territories
are not necessarily all equal. In fact, frequently they're not equal. They will vary quite a bit in quality. That you tend to see the strongest or largest males defending
the optimal territories. Those territories may be optimal because
they have a lot of food sources, or they may be optimal specifically
because that's where the females are. Now a key part of this idea of delineating
and defending a territory is intimidation. That you need to keep other
males away from your territory. So, how do you do this? Well, animals have adopted
a lot of different ways for doing this across species. So, in the case of the red wing
blackbird that you see over here, he has these big red patches on his wings. And it's thought that those
actually function for warding off potential
threatening other males. The way that researches have studied this,
or one of the ways they studied this, is to get stuffed red winged black birds, the
ones that are dead, and set them up there. And what they found is if the stuffed
one had its patch painted over, so that it was black, it was attacked
very frequently by other males. In contrast, if there was this big red patch other
males would basically leave it alone. So clearly, these red patches are enough
to keep the other males away. Now, it's unclear why that's the case, and it could be this is some sort of indicator
of ability, that maybe the males that have the big red patches tend to be
healthier or something like that. We'll come back to that in the next video,
but I just wanted to toss that out. But not all these signals are visual. If you look below here,
we have the red eyed tree frog. Now what this does,
is it will tend to vibrate branches. Again, it is thought that this
sort of vibration is done to ward off other potential competing males
who may want access to their territory. It's seeing or feeling these
vibrations will ward off their rivals. But again, maybe this is
an indication of ability as well. Everything we've talked about so far
has been in the context of this sort of attack, dominance,
warding off other things. Sometimes, animals like to be
just a little bit sneaky instead. So here's the case we're looking
at different strategies for getting access to males. And remember, not all males need
to do exactly the same thing. It might not be your be your best at this
and therefore that's the best thing to do, maybe there's different approaches. So here in this case,
we're looking at a marine isopod. Now this particular isopod
has three different forms. Now these are genetically determined. So there's what referred to as an alpha
form, a beta form, and a gamma form. The alpha form is sort of the typical
male that you would imagine. This is a big male, it fights off intruder males, it guards
harems of females, things like that. The beta male's a little more sneaky. What it does is it
actually mimics a female. It'll slip into the harem and
sometimes have some activities there with the females in
the harems, so that is one strategy. Another strategy is this gamma. These are very small ones,
they tend to be very fast. Maybe they make juveniles, but
they slip into these harems and slip out. Interestingly, all three of these forms
persist in individual populations. Suggesting that on average relative to
their frequency that they're equally fit. So this is a very
interesting case where you have these three different approaches for
getting access to the females. Now, everything we've talked about so far this video has been in terms
of competition among males. So let's start looking at the other half. The females choose among these
competing males, as well. It's not just that you beat
out the other males, but the female has to actually
want to mate with the male. So what it is that
females are attracted to, because sometimes they will select amongst
a pool of males that are all available. Well they may be attracted to various
visible characters or displays. So maybe having this long tail
isn't necessarily better for fighting off other males
like in the tail here, but maybe instead it's actually
attractive to the females. There's some evidence that's true. And maybe the females are attracted
to good territories or nests. Therefore they can be provisioned better. Or it may be they're attracted to
particular kinds of calls or smells, or something like that. Now, all these female
preferences that exist will impose selection on the males, right? The males will respond to this. That those males that have the more
attractive traits will get more matings, and therefore those traits will
spread by natural selection. So let's look at one setting for
where this female choice occurs. This is kind of an extreme one, but
sometimes there are these competitive arenas for female choice where you'll have
a set of males all displaying together, and almost in a competitive sort of way,
and the females just wander through and choose a male. This is referred to as a lek. One of the most studied leks
is that of the sage grouse, this particular bird down here. Again, all the males come together. They're doing their little dances and
displays. The females wander through and
they choose which ones they want. Some people have suggested that
maybe bars are a human lek. I'm just kidding. I just wanted to toss
that in there [LAUGH]. But anyway, you see the sort of
competitive arena does exist. Now We've talked about competition as
though it was something that was very obvious. But competition and choice may actually
be less visible than is obvious. Now we've talked about competition and choice as being something
that's very obvious. But in fact,
both of those may be something that is not easily seen by an observer
from the outside. So looking at this, this is a damselfly. And what the damselfly male does is,
he has a very interestingly shaped male penis that goes into the female, and
it actually will remove sperm from the previous mating before he puts his
in or while he's putting his sperm in. So that's that kind of an unusual way
of getting rid of the competition from a previous mating with the female. And lest you think this
is exclusive to insects, in fact, this is actually
thought to occur in primates. In fact,
chimps have spines on their penises. This picture over here is from a marmoset,
rather than a chimp, but see, these are the spikes on the marmoset's
penis, on the side of his penis. And it's thought they use these
penile spines to remove sperm from competitors when
they mate with females. Fortunately, the human species has
actually lost these spines, so we don't actually have those. Now we talk about this now in
the context of getting rid of the sperm of another male, but sometimes you have direct competition of
sperm happening inside the female as well. It doesn't have to be these
dancing displays, but it could be something
that's completely internal. Now there's a couple of different
ways this could happen. One is that some animals will ejaculate
non-fertilizing products first. And what they're trying to do
is essentially wash out or somehow incapacitate the earlier sperm. So ejaculates have these offensive and
defensive capabilities. Sometimes this offensive one is just
wash out what's already in there. Other times you have this
defensive capability where it will somehow try to keep
the sperm that's in there. Along those lines, a lot of animals have
what's referred to as a copulatory plug. This is true in rodents, and
some insects, and reptiles as well. Where they'll put this gelatinous mass to try to basically plug in their
sperm after they're mating. That's one strategy. Now, some animals will ejaculate
very large quantities of sperm just to out-compete the possible past sperm. And some animals will,
this is kind of a really sneaky one. They'll put anti-aphrodisiacs
into the female. Well, what those anti-aphrodisiacs
do is they make the female disinclined to mate again. It's basically manipulating the behavior
of the female chemically by putting something in there. There's a lot of interesting strategies. Now you may be wondering about this little
bird that's sitting here in the corner. That is the dunnock. It is a European bird. What happens in that case is the male,
when he's about to mate with the female, he will peck at the cloaca
of the female and basically try to force her to eject
the sperm from previous matings. Not a very nice prospect. So, given what you've learned, in which of
the following situations might you expect to see the most defenses to
sperm competition evolve. Do you expect it in species in
which females mate multiply? Do you expect it in species that
have very little sexual dimorphism? And we talked about that
in the previous video. Do you expect it in species that have
males successfully defending harems for multiple seasons? Or do you expect it in species with
effective seminal fluid anti-aphrodisiacs? Think about that for a second,
and then try this question. Well, I hope that wasn't too difficult. The answer, as you saw,
was indeed the first one. You have to multiple mating for
sperm competition to be important. Why not these other ones? Well, if you have little sexual
dimorphism, what does that mean? You may remember I said in the last
video that sexual dimorphism correlates with the intensity of sexual selection, or
basically the variance in mating success. So, if you have very
little sexual dimorphism, it's basically almost like
having monogamy, potentially. So as you approach monogamy, you're
going to have less sexual dimorphism. So you really don't expect this
to be the case where you're going to need sperm competition. You don't expect it where males
are successfully defending harems for multiple seasons, because if
they're defending the harems for multiple seasons then who
are they competing with? Only themselves. And last, but not least, again if
females have these anti-aphrodisiacs put into them, they're not going
to mate again very readily and therefore you're not going to have
the same sort of intensity of competition. So, let me close out this video by talking
about why does female choice evolve. Well, there has to be some sort of
benefit for this choice to evolve. Or, you think that would be true,
at least. So, what are these benefits to
the female for being choosy? Why don't they just mate with
whatever male wins the fight? Why do they actually have to
pick particular characters? And related to this is how do these
preferences spread in natural populations? Well that will be the subject
of our next video. Thank you and I hope you enjoyed this.