Hello.
Welcome back to Introduction to Genetics and Evolution. In the previous video, we looked at
the types of selection that can operate on a single locus or
single gene in the genome. In that case, we looked at the effects
of dominance in particular on directional selection. We talked about other forms of
single locus selection such as heterozygote advantage
which is over dominance. Under dominance or
heterozygote disadvantage and negative frequency dependent selection. Now, if you go back, Darwin of course
didn't know anything about genetics. He, instead, thought of natural selection
in the context of variation and traits. Now that's what a lot of breeders do when
they're applying artificial selection to say there dogs or cattle or corn or
whatever they may be using. Now, natural selection can be studied in
the context of quantitative traits or in the context of single loci. Now, when we talked about it in
the context of heritability previously, we were thinking of it in terms
of these quantitative traits. And you don't necessarily need
to know the underlying genes to infer what kind of selection is operating. So let's talk about the types of selection
that can be inferred when you're looking at phenotypes and changes in phenotypes
over time or changes in traits over time. This is a picture from the Freeman and
Herron book and this depicts three kinds of selection
that I'll introduce to you. Directional selection is a little
bit different than the previous directional selection we talked about when
we're looking at a single gene thing. It's very unfortunate they
happen to have the same name. But in this case,
we're looking at selection which favors one extreme of the distribution
over the other. So we have here in the top picture, the
number of individuals before selection, so it's particular distribution. We have in the second graph
the probability of surviving, so in this case the ones that have the higher
trait values have a higher probability of surviving than the lower ones. And then, in the bottom part, we see the number of individuals having
these different traits after selection. In this case,
we see sort of a change in the mean. The mean here started just below seven,
here it's just above seven, supposed to be directional selection. I'll introduce each of these in
more detail in just a moment. We have one called stabilizing selection, where individuals with
the intermediate value are favored. And we have disruptive selection, individuals with the extreme
values are favored. Let's go over these in terms. This first example is directional
selection or applying this in the context of phenotypes, we're not looking at
the single gene version of it, and I apologize again they tend to have
the same name, it's very confusing. But again with this, individuals at one
end of the distribution are favored. So if we imagine
the x-axis here is height, say that's the trait value on there. Then, with this particular thing then,
the probability of surviving is higher for those that are taller, whereas it's
very low for those that are short. So what this will do is it'll change
the mean of the population over time. The assumption here is that
there's some heritability, that there's some heritable
component to height and therefore selection can
induce this sort of a change. In this case, what you see is, you see
the shift over from a mean of just below seven, to a mean of just about
seven in this fictional example. Well, let me show you a real example. This shows change over time in
pink salmon weight in Canada. So this is from two different places where
pink salmon were caught several times. We see here that the average weight
in 1951, 1952 was a little bit over four pounds, and we see over time,
smaller and smaller salmon are caught. Same thing with Upper Johnston Strait
over time, smaller and smaller salmon are caught. This has been shown in pictures as well. Here's an excerpt from a magazine. This is showing collections from the same
place in over three time periods. Here is the 1950s. Look at the size of those fish. They are a mammoth. In the 1980s, they are pretty good. In 2007, they are fairly small. What happened? Well, when people go fishing, they go out
there, they catch the biggest fish and those are the ones they take home and eat. Smaller fish are less likely to be caught
or may be more likely to be thrown back. So over time, there has been this
selection for favoring smaller fish or for smaller fish. That is directional selection
acting on the phenotype of size, in this case in pounds. Let's look at an example of
another kind of selection. This is an example of
stabilizing selection. This is a case where individuals in the
middle of the distribution are favored, so they have the highest fitness. Whereas individuals near the ends have
a lower probability of surviving. In this particular case,
there's no change in the mean, but you actually end up losing
some of the extreme. Well there's a classic
story that goes with this. In the late 1800s, a fellow named
Bumpus lived up in New England, and he was interested in the sparrows
that were found there. A big ice storm hit New England,
lots and lots of birds died. He went out there and
brought back a lot of birds that were sitting out there in the snow not doing so
well. And what he found looking at these
house spurs, he brought in 136, 64 of them died and 72 survived. What he found is that
the mean of the survivors and the mean of the dead was about the same. They were about 26 grams, in size. In contrast, if you look at the extreme,
all the ones that were more than 28 grams and all the ones
that were less than 23 grams died. There were some that died that
were intermediate there, but all the ones with extreme values died, so
they had a lower probability of survival. Whereas the ones with intermediate traits,
they were more likely to survive. Well there's a definite example
of stabilizing selection that operates in humans. Can you think of what that would be? Something where the intermediate
values are favored. And that answer is, human birth weight. And again, we tend to think of
very small babies that are two or three pounds, their probability
of survival is not very high. If you have an eight pound baby,
a nine pound baby, they have a pretty good
probability of surviving. When you get up to the 12,
13 pound babies, again it goes back down. A lot of them do survive,
especially with medical intervention, but the probabilities tend to go down, especially if you have less
medical intervention there. Again, individuals in the middle of
distribution are favored by natural selection. So this would be a case
of stabilizing selection. I should emphasize, stabilizing selection
is not the same as over dominance. Over dominance is something that happens
when you're looking at a single gene. This is looking at
a pattern in phenotypes. It's a common error,
I just wanna make sure to emphasize that. Last but not least, disruptive selection. This is basically the exact
opposite of stabilizing selection. The individuals at the two ends of
the distribution tend to be favored. Again in this case,
you have no change in the mean, even though you're losing those
individuals that may have the mean values, but you have an increase in those
with the extremes, both high and low, and you have a loss of
the intermediate phenotypes. So you have basically a greater variance,
over time. There are examples of this, this is the
one that was published around 1992 or so. This is looking at beak
size in African finch. And what people found is that when
you're looking at the females, they tend to specialize on
two sedge species, seeds. And those with particular bills,
this set can specialize one type, this set can specialize on another type,
but the intermediate ones actually are not
as good at either type of seed. So the intermediate ones here where
ones near the mean are not as good, they have lower fit. It is better to have one of
the more extremes in this case. So, those are again, the three types of selection that you
can infer from looking at phenotypes. Directional, where you have
a change in the mean and one end is favored,
could be the other way, too. Stabilizing selection, where the ones near
the mean are favored, you lose variance. You lose those extremes. Or disruptive selection, where
the intermediate ones are unfavored and you have an increase in variance,
an increase in those extremes. Before we leave selection behind for
this particular lecture, I'd like to close with
a few final thoughts. Is selection good or bad for population? We tend to conceive of selection
as being something bad, to imagine the sort of struggle. And some genotypes not being able to pass
themselves on, some individuals being left out of the population whatever species it
is, we're looking at animals or plants. In fact, that's a very bias view. Natural selection is preferentially
reducing or eliminating the bad genotypes. When I say bad genotypes, it's those
ones that are not as well-suited to passing along, or producing offspring. So either they have
a deficit in survival or they have a deficit in production
relative to other genotypes. As such, because we're getting rid
of these so-called bad genotypes, the average fitness of all the remaining
individuals in the population after selection actually goes up. That, if you look at the people who are
still there after selection has operated, on average they tend to be more fit. Now the reason for this is that
the bad alleles have been removed. And this is especially true when you're
looking at simple directional selection. And ultimately,
this will lead to a long-term improvement of the population's ability to survive and
reproduce. Now, in this regard, directional selection
is improving the average population fitness and the speed with which it does. It has been described by Ronald Fisher
who's depicted here on the slide. And what's referred to is Fisher's
fundamental theorem of natural selection. This is elaborated very
nicely in his 1930 book. But he identified that the rate of
increase in fitness in directional selection is equal to
the genetic variance in fitness. And we could think of this as similar to
the variability aspects we talked about earlier, right? Selection acts on that aspect of
the trait that has a genetic basis, right, that VG is what responds to
selection out of the overall VP. So in terms of overall fitness,
we see the same sort of concept applying. The rate of increasing fitness is equal
to the genetic variance in fitness. So there's a lot of variance in fitness. Then you'll see large step changes in
the overall average population fitness. In contrast, if most individuals
have fairly similar fitness, you won't get that much of an increase
in overall population fitness. So I just wanted to present that to you
as a couple of closing thoughts cuz these are some neat ideas that have
been around for quite some time. And I hope you've enjoyed these
lectures on natural selection. In subsequent videos, we'll look at
another very important evolutionary force, one that's far more random. We'll be looking at genetic drift,
so stay tuned. Thank you.