Hello, and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In the previous video we talked about
basic single-gene inheritance, or basic Mendelian inheritance. It's called this because this was
elaborated first by Austrian monk Gregor Mendel. We saw how you get single copies of
genes or alleles from one parent and then they combine with single copies of
genes or alleles from another parent. In this video we'll talk about
a special case of inheritance that of X-linked inheritance. What happens when genes are on the X
chromosome, some of you may have heard of. The other thing we'll talk about
is following what happens with multiple genes. This is something we'll doing
quite a bit later in the course. Where we will begin at now looking at
the principle of independent assortment. This is something that was also elaborated
by Austrian Monk Gregor Mendel. Now some chromosomes have slightly
different patterns of inheritance from what I described previously. In terms of the single copy from males, single copy from females
going to offspring. And this was first hypothesized partially
because there are some hereditary diseases that pop up much more
frequently in males than in females. And this is true even when both
sexes are likely to get the disease. You just see a lot more men
having it than women having it. There are some cases of muscular
dystrophy, for example, which fit this description. Now Drosophila geneticist
Thomas Hunt Morgan studied this around the turn of the 20th century. He was working with fruit flies, and specifically working with
a white-eyed mutant fly. He found that inheritance
was sometimes different depending on the sex of individual. If you tracked what was happening with
particular genes in males versus in females you're getting
completely different pattern. He inferred from this the principle
of sex linkage or X-linkage. We now know that there are some
genes that are actually not present in two copies in all of them. That quite often you'll find that,
in humans, males may have one copy of a gene, and
females may actually have two copies. And these are genes that are on what's
referred to as the X chromosome. So often across species, males are XY. So they have one copy of the X chromosome, and instead of having a second copy
have this other chromosome called Y. Whereas females have two copies,
so females are called XX. You've probably heard this one. Now, there's not the same
set of genes on the X as on the Y despite the fact these
two chromosomes pair and separate. You'll see the principle using them is
very similar to what we discussed before. Except that the X has one set of genes and
the Y often has a different set and in fact, often has very few functions. In humans, one of the few genes on
the Y chromosome is a gene which basically makes the embryo become a male. Now again, in this case, you get different patterns of inheritance
depending on who's the mom, who's the dad. And whether you're looking at male or
female offspring from them. Now I mentioned muscular dystrophy. Another example is green color blindness. Now this is an X-linked
recessive in humans. Meaning that if you have,
if you're a female and you have two copies of this particular
mutation then you will be colorblind. Males only get one because it is on the X
chromosome, so if they have the one copy, they are colorblind. This picture on the screen depicts what
somebody with green color blindness may actually see when you're
looking at the pictures. So on the, in the picture on the left,
it has the number 74 very clearly visible. In the picture on the right,
if you're green color blind, you actually won't see the 74, in fact,
you may see a different number in there. Now inheritance of genes on
the X chromosome can be studied very similarly to what we described. And again, using the Punnet square,
just like we did before. And what happens in this case is
you just insert a Y instead of the second allele that
would go into males. So let's try this now. Let's imagine that you're studying
red-green colorblindness, something that I just mentioned is something
that's inherited on the X chromosome. Let's say hypothetically that you have
a male which is red green color blind. So here he is. Here's his X chromosome and
I'll put a little rcb on there for red green color blind. For the female, let's say that she is
just normal, she does not have this. She just has two regular Xs. So we can follow what happens in
this case just like we did before. So again, the male is equally
likely to either give this X, which has this mutation, or the Y. I've already drawn in the Ys there for
us, so here, let's put this in. Here's the male's X rcb, X rcb, okay? The female will always give
her just regular X, regular X, regular X, regular X. Well what do we see here? The male offspring are the two on
the bottom because those are the ones that have the Y chromosome. You don't become a male unless
you have a Y chromosome. So this is true in humans,
it's not true in all species. So looking at these
individuals on the bottom, would they be red-green colorblind or no? So look at it carefully. There is no red-green colorblind
mutation on them, right? So the two males here would be just fine,
write the word fine. What about the females? Well the females do get the red-green
colorblind mutation, but I mentioned it's recessive. So they have one normal copy and
one sort of broken copy. So in this case, again,
the females would also be [INAUDIBLE]. Well that was interesting. Well, let's try something
a little bit different. Let's switch it around. This time, let's say the mom
was red-green colorblind, and the dad had perfect vision. Okay, so, this case here is dad,
he's got just a regular X. Mom's got X with a rcb mutation. X with a rcb mutation. So let's follow patterns of inheritance. Again, the dad's always giving a Y,
in this case, he's giving an X. And mom is always giving an X rcb. So now what do we see? Well let's look first at the girls. So the girls are the two X's. So they have one normal X chromosome and one with the mutation for
red-green colorblind. So again,
the daughters in this case would be fine. So this is similar to
what we saw last time. However, look at the boys. The only X chromosome the boys
have has this mutation. So in fact the boys are actually
red-green colorblind. So we see a different pattern
of inheritance in this case depending on whether your looking
at the daughters or the sons. And depending on who is the mom and
who is the dad. So this illustrates some
principles of X-linked. Now let's look a little bit
more broadly at the gene. Now everything we've focused on so far has
been looking at single genes in isolation. But the genome's a very big place. A human genome for example has on
the order of 23,000 protein coding genes. These are genes that
actually make protein. It has many other
important things in there. There are other things that affects
how much a protein are made, etc, these are called regulatory regions, etc. Now, again, we have 23 pars of
chromosomes, one pair being that X and Y. The other pairs being ones that follow
just regular Mendelian inheritance, as we described before. Interestingly, you see all these pairs
of 23 chromosomes in the picture on the bottom left here, they're
actually all inherited independently. So, let's say, for example, I have
a particular chromosome two from my dad, I have a particular
chromosome two from my mom. I have a particular
chromosome three from my dad, I have a particular
chromosome three from my mom. If I give to my daughter,
my dad's chromosome two, there is no way that you can know which copy of
my chromosome three I'm may be giving. I'm equally likely to give my dad's or
my moms chromosome three. And basically what's happening
with the chromosome is independent of what's happening on
these other chromosomes. You're not more likely to give
both your dad's copies or both your mom's copies when you're
looking at different chromosomes. This is referred to as Mendel's Law
of Independent Assortment. So what happens when you're studying two
traits that are inherited from genes are different chromosome. Well, let's look at two traits. In this case I'm looking at two
that show patterns similar to being single-gene inheritance. They're not actually inherited
through single genes. One of them is what happens when you
put your hands together like this. Watch.
Put your hands together like that and see which thumb is on top. In my case my right thumb is on top, for
a lot of people the left thumb is on top. For a long time people though this
was inherited as single gene. That actually probably isn't' true, but just pretend that's the case for
right now. If you study the inheritance of this,
it looks like the left one on top one is dominant,
the right thumb on top is recessive. The other trait we'll look at, is again dealing with thumbs
because they're easy to show. It's straight thumb,
which looks like this. Or hitchhiker's thumb, mine is definitely
hitchhiker, it comes really far back. Well, it's thought that straight thumb is
dominant, so I have both recessive in this case, whereas the hitchhiker's
thumb is recessive. So, let's say you were following
these two traits together, let's say you're following
inheritance of them. Let's do a hypothetical example. Let's say that you have a dad who has
left thumb on top and straight thumb. Having kids with a mom that has
right thumb on top and hitchhiker. So let's call them just using these letters right here to make it
a little easier to follow, big T big T, big S big S crossed with
little t, little t, little s, little s. In this case this is referring to
straight versus hitchhiker for the S and left versus right
where capital T is a left. So let's follow what happened. Well the offspring will
obviously get one big T, one little t, one big S,
one little s, right? Because there's no alternative. So here we go, here is the kids. Big T little T, Big S little S. And let's say the kids marry
each other and have kids. That's a little gross, I'm sorry but
let's pretend this just for a moment. What will we see in their offspring? Well, the kids can give
different alleles right? This boy right here could give his
big T or he could give his little t. He could give his big S or
could give his little s. And the same thing's
happening with the girl here. So it's a little bit more complicated
then what's going to happen. These T and S alleles are going to be
inherited independently from the parents. But again if you give the big T,
you are not more or less likely to get the big S or
the little s. So, I showed here on the picture for
possible gametes, big T, big S, big T, little s, little t,
big S and little t with little s. Those are the four possible
gametes you can get. Now there's two ways you can try to
predict what the offspring would be like. The better way which I'll show you second
is to actually multiply probabilities. We'll come back to that in just a moment. The other thing you can do which
is maybe more intuitive but definitely more laborious is to follow
what's happening with all the gamete. Workout all sixteen possibilities. So let's do that one first. I won't do the whole thing,
I'll just show you how it would go. So again, here's the thing. We can fill this in, remember all
four gametes we have are big T big S, big T little s, little t big S, little T
little s, so that's true for one of these. Let's do the other one. Big T little s, little t big S, and you can follow what's going to
happen with each of these things. This case mom will always be giving
a big T, always be giving a big S. Dad will be giving a big T,
he'll be giving a big S. So there's one individual. This is gonna take forever if I do this so let me just fill in what
all the answers would be. Boom!
[LAUGH] So here is all the possible outcomes there. And I have here up in the upper
left corner a little cheat sheet. So you can see what, what happens in terms of what they
would look like or their genotype. But if you have a big T you
got your left thumb top. If you have a big S then you're
straight rather than checkered. So let's look at the ratio here. How many individuals would be left and
straight? Remember, left and
straight are both dominant. Let's count them. This one, this one, this one,
this one, this one, This one. Am I missing some? This one. [INAUDIBLE]
there's one. There's one. So one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine. So we have nine that are dominant for
both. How many would be right straight? Right thumb on top, straight. So in this case, right thumb on top
straight would be little t but big S. Little t but
big S would be this one, this one. There, those three, okay? So you have three that are dominant for
one, recessive for the other. The opposite would also be three. This would be what happened if you're
left thumb on top, but hitchhiker. That would be these three over here,
I'll put X in this time. I misspoke sorry,
this would be left thumb on top and hitchhiker The other one was
right thumb on top and straight. So again, three for
when you have one dominant and one recessive and
finally one that's the double recessive. So the ratio you get is 9 to 3 to 3 to 1. So again, there's 16 possible outcomes
here and this is the ratio we expected. That was laborious. [LAUGH] So let's see how we could do
this a little bit more straightforward. Well there's a very simple thing you
could use for basic probability. That if you have two independent events,
all you have to do is to multiply the probabilities with for
the joint probability. Just like when you're flipping a coin. What are the odds you flip a coin and
get heads twice? Well, the odds of you flipping a coin and
getting heads the first time is one half, odds of you flipping it a second time and
getting heads is also one half. So it'd be one quarter. We can apply this same
principal to this problem. Here is all the possible outcomes when you
are looking at just one gene in isolation. So we have here, this what we would see if
we were just looking at what's happening with the T gene. The one that controls left
versus right thumb on top. Using the four possibilities when
you are looking at hitch-hiker versus straight thumb. So, all you have to do is just multiply
the probabilities to get these different genotypes. So we say big T big T, big S, big S. That would be one sixteenth. Big T, big T, big S, little s,
that will be one quarter times one-half. Half, quarters,
this would be this case one-eighth. And we can fill in this whole thing. There we go. We filled them all in. Now, if we do the same thing, let's add which ones will be
left thumb on top straight. Well, we can just add them up, let's do
it by 16ths so it's a little bit clear. So there's one here,
this'll be plus another two, cuz one-eight is two-sixteenths, right? So this would be three. So one plus two is three. Plus two is five. In this case plus four is nine. So again we have 9/16 have
left thumbs straight. So again if you do this whole thing
it becomes 9/16, 3/16, 3/16 and the last one over here being the 1/16. We get that same overall ratio and this time we can do it just
by multiplying probability. So let me give you one
to try on your own and then I'll give you
a problem at the end of it. So again, assume independent
assortment between A and B genes. What will the genotypes and proportions be
of the offspring if you're looking at big A, little a, big B, little b? So this is the double-header zygote again. Crossed with big A,
little a, little b little b? It's a little bit different in this case. So what I suggest you do is to
multiply the probabilities. So look at what's happening
just with the A gene, and look at what's happening
just with the B gene. And multiply those probabilities together. Let me give you a moment to try
this out and solve this problem.