Hello, and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In the previous video, we talked
extensively about population growth rate. I identified for you the intrinsic
rate of population increase. That is the birth rate
minus the death rate. For most species, the birth rate tends
to be much higher than the death rate, meaning the capacity for
growing is very high. In this video I'd like to introduce to
you the concept of carrying capacity. That is the maximum number of
individuals that could be supported in an environment the way it is. Now I showed you this slide previously. This is looking at human population growth
over the last several thousand years, and projecting into the future. And you can see human
population growth is very high. Our birth rate greatly exceeds
our death rate, presently. And you can see this by this increase
in number of individuals over time. Now, our growth rate has slowed
since 1960s, 1970s so, meaning that the difference between the birth
rate and the death rate has gone down. But it's still positive. There still are more people
born than are dying. Now, intrinsically this is not a problem, but what if there are not enough
resources to sustain everyone? Well, this again ties into that
concept of carrying capacity, which is often abbreviated as K. Now this is the total number
of individuals that can be supported within a population. Well, what determines
this carrying capacity? What determines how many people
can be supported in a population? Well the answer is,
it's determined by the environment. Now, the question is, what happens when
you exceed this carrying capacity? What happens when you go too high? Well, there's two things that can happen. The number of individuals that
are present cannot be supported. So either you have to have a very
sudden decrease in birth rate, that everybody holds back reproduction. That typically doesn't
happen in most species. Or you can have, unfortunately,
an increase in the death rate. So let's think about the impact
of human population growth. Now, our world population already
exceeds 7 billion people. Now, most of this growth, as I mentioned
has come about and is sustainable so far because of increases in hygiene,
in medicine, etc. So, and also, additionally to that, we
are much better at producing food and etc. And technology has compensated. It's prevented these mass famines. There are still some famines in
some parts of the world, but technology has definitely helped. The question is how long will this last? For many years people have
talked about a population bomb, that at some point in time
we're going to hit the wall. Now again,
technology has staved this off for part of the world but
not all of the world. What's going to happen next? Well let me ask a different
question first. Why haven't we all starved yet? Why is it that we are able to get
all the way above seven billion? Well again, so far food production, and
this is averaging across the whole world, again some parts of
the world don't have this. Food production has increased
faster than population increased. The food production has actually increased
three fold while population has only increased two fold in
the span of this figure here. Now, that can only work to a certain
degree because the food that we use, it can only be produced so fast, and we're continuing to reproduce
at very high levels. So, let me give you a problem to try. Let's use the formula that
I gave you before, N sub t, which is the population size at time t,
is equal to N sub 0 e to the r t. Now let's say the current
world population is 7 billion. Let's pretend, I just made this number up,
the carrying capacity of the Earth is 20 billion, and let's say that's
a future carrying capacity. And let's say that r is 0.012. That's the difference between
the birth rate and the death rate. How many years until we
have massive deaths? Well I think that was a pretty
straightforward problem. Again, we have the formula. N sub t = N sub 0 e to the rt. Now what we're looking for
is getting to this carrying capacity. And we'll say that's
the time we're looking for. So N sub t then would be 20 billion. That's the carrying capacity we identify. N sub zero is 7 billion, approximate for
the current population so that's not exact anymore but
it's close and R is is equal to 0.012. When we put in all the numbers
just as we had before, 20 billion equals 7
billion e to the 0.012t. So let's solve this out then. We divide 20 billion by 7 billion, and we get from that 2.85 equal to e to the 0.012t. And so all I do is divided
20 billion by 7 billion. That's how I got this. So I take the natural log of both sides. Natural log of 2.85 is
just a little bit over 1. So that would be 1.05 is equal to 0.012t. Now I divide both sides by 0.012. And what I get is t is equal to about 87,
so 87 years. Now I assume the world can
hold 20 billion people. That may or may not be true. That may be a high estimate. Maybe that's more that can actually
be supported on the Earth. Could be a low estimate. But 87 years until we start
seeing massive death. Well is it gonna be massive deaths? Well what happens when we
hit carrying capacity? Well, one possibility is
we may see a sudden crash. So this is a typical graph you'd see,
where you see the carrying capacity and then boom the population goes down. And it goes down dramatically. So what caused this would
be a lot of people dying. This has been observed in some cases. This shows, as it depicts over here,
the populations of the St. Matthews Island reindeer herd. They saw this dramatic
increase in numbers, and then a very sudden loss of resources,
and boom, crashed down. That was very unfortunate. You may also see a leveling off. You may see it goes up, then it comes
down a little bit, and it oscillates, stays around the carrying capacity. This was observed in some classic
studies using paramecium, where here's P cardatum or P aurelia. It would increase to a level and
then level off. Now, leveling off sounds good,
leveling off at a carrying capacity but you have to think of what
does this actually mean. When you level off you're either
having a decrease in birth rate. I'm not sure if you're
actually gonna have that. The alternative is you're having
an increase in death rate. That is obviously less positive. You may see different
outcomes in different places. Maybe in some parts of the world you would
actually have a decrease in birth rate enough to level it off. Other parts you may see
an increase in death rate. But this leveling off or what's often
referred to as the logistic model of population growth is not necessarily
a very good thing to happen. I mean, it's good in the sense that
it stops population growth but it's bad in that it often means we
are having in increase in our death rate. So if things are remaining unchanged,
at some point in time, human population growth will exceed
our ability to support that growth. So what do we do about this or
what do we do next? Well, there have been some
proposals of what to do and I mentioned the one child policy which was
an attempt to decrease the birth rate. There have been more
disturbing ones though too. So Ronald Fisher, who is the person who actually invented
the analysis of variance test. Ronald Fisher suggested in his 1930 book,
and this is a very disturbing proposal. The most obvious requirement from society
capable of making evolutionary progress, in accordance with its current needs, is
that reproduction should be somewhat more active among its more successful,
than among its less successful members. It's a direct quote from his book. So basically,
he was advocating as he put it himself, a moderate superiority of
upper class fertility. That basically we should let people in the
upper class reproduce more than people in the lower classes. That is a very disturbing proposal,
one with which I don't agree at all. We'll come back to this thing, though, later in a later lecture that's referred
to as Evolutionary Applications and Misapplications, with
emphasis on that later point. Now you may be wondering,
how accurate is this math? I mean I just gave you a bunch of numbers
there and it looks a little scary but is this actually meaningful? Well, there are some assumptions. One of the assumptions
is assuming constancy. It's assuming that the intrinsic
rate of increase doesn't change. And we know that's not always true. And we know that again that the rate of
increase is not the same in all different populations. We look at the developing world,
for example, the rate of increase is much faster
than in the developed countries. Now what this is showing
you is an age pyramid. On the left side of each line here is
the number of males, on the right side is the number of females, and
this is the population in millions. And the y-axis here is age. So, in this case, there's a lot of very
young individuals, not so many old. In developed countries we tend to
see fairly even distribution of age. There's about as many 60 to 64 year
olds as there are 20 to 24 year olds. And you can see this by the numbers too. In sub-Saharan Africa 43% of
the population is under age 15. In contrast, in Europe, only 16%
of the population is under age 15. Same sort of difference when
you're looking at the older ones. In Europe,
16% of the population is age 65 or older. In sub-Saharan Africa,
it's only 3% of the population. So this is going to effect the rate
at which populations are increasing. And the numbers I give you are assuming
this constant age structure, which you won't necessarily see. You'll often see this difference
between rapid and slow growth. The other thing is that
carrying capacity can change. So you can have innovations in farming. That would be a positive change,
where maybe those innovations will allow more food to be produced than
was able to be produced before. That might raise the carrying capacity and
stave off the problem. In contrast, you could have depletion of
non-renewable or less-renewable resources. That would be very negative. That's probably what happened in the
context of those island reindeer that you saw before. That there was some resource
that they were consuming and once it was consumed it was gone. And it was gone not such that it could
just come back the next year, but it was gone for quite some time. That could dramatically reduce
the carrying capacity and it could cause it to start at one place, and then
in future generations be much, much lower. So you'd have a much more severe
crash than you would otherwise. You could also have other changes in
the environment that again make it so you could not support as many individuals. Some species I mentioned
exhibit these booms and busts, while others have more
of a cyclical process. So again this is the St Matthew's Island
reindeer herd, went up very high and then crashed very, very hard. In contrast, this is a case of
the lynx and hare in Canada. We see these population cycles
that rabbits become very abundant, lynxes eat them,
lynxes become very abundant. But after lynxes become very abundant,
the rabbits are mostly gone, lynxes crash. The rabbits then grow after lynxes crash. So you have this booms and
busts over and over again. Honestly, we don't know
what's going to happen. And, you know, these are all just
possibilities that we're looking at. The important thing here is we can
mathematically show that this is something to be aware of and concerned about. Ultimately, the math isn't perfect, but it's a starting point, just as I said
before in the context of variability. This is informative for
a particular circumstances or for. Thank you for your time,
hope this was interesting.