Hello, and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. In the previous video, we talked about the
principles associated with mapping complex traits and how we do this in both crosses
and using genome wide population studies. In this video,
we'll elaborate on the previous one, to look at actually what's done in
genetic crosses, to pinpoint the location of genes that affect,
that have a affecting some sort of trait. Now again, as I said at
the very end of the last video, the ultimate prediction is that if we
looked at many linked markers, we should be able to pinpoint the location of the
QTL by where the association is strongest. And we talked about exactly what
that meant in that context. So what we'll do is we'll follow
the trajectory of association strength to infer the location of the QTL. Now, let me illustrate this with
an example so you know what I mean, cuz trajectory of association strength may
be a little bit difficult to understand. So let's use an example
from the mapping cross. We'll stick with the same example
of corn that we used last time. This was a cross where we crossed
a tall stream to a short stream, a tall stream is five feet tall,
a short stream is one foot tall. We got F ones that were intermediate,
they were three feet tall. And then we crossed the F ones to each
other and got a lot of variation, where some individuals were five foot
tall, some individuals were one, and a lot of them were kind of in the middle. We got sort of that bell curve. Now what we're not trying to do, is we're not trying to get
recombination fractions this time. This is different from what we did in
the context of simple genetic traits. It's much more complicated when something
is complex, so we're not gonna do that. What we're just gonna be doing is looking
at the association of genotype and phenotype, okay. Just looking at that association. Now we can see how strong it is, remember
strength is defined by the average difference between the genotypes, okay. So what we'll do is we'll genotype five
markers rather than two this time, and look at how they associate with
height in these corn, okay. So let's dive in. So let's say you're looking at
five close markers to the trait. These markers are about 2
centimorgans apart from each other. So the markers recombine from each other,
the alleles of these markers recombine from each other at
an average rate of about 2%. Now lets say we're gonna
put on our divine glasses, where we now can see what
the actual answer will be. So with our divine glasses we see
that the height gene is next to C. Now we don't know that, as scientists,
we don't typically know that, but for this example, let's say that we do. Would we see an association of
height with the E genotype? Okay, so
we know the height gene is next to C. But we see an association
with the E genes. Well the E gene is only about
4 centimorgans away, so sure! Of course we'd see an association with it. It's pretty darn close to that
gene configuration in height. We might see something like this
where the E gene, if you're big E, big E, you're 3.5 feet tall. In this case again, I'm using a case where
all the capital letters are derived from the tall parent, and the lower case
letter's derived from the short parent. The big E, big E ones are 3.5,
the little e, little e ones are 2.5. Okay? So again, we do predict some
association between E and height because it's only
about centimorgans away. But what about D? Do we think there'll be any
association between D and height? Well obviously, the answer is yes. Sure, but the important thing
here is we see the genotypes at D are more strongly associated with height. So you see the difference
here between big E, big E and little e, little e was about one foot. Here between big D, big D and
little d, little d it's 1.4 feet, so more the variation is explained by
genotypes at D than by genotypes at E. And that's because the D marker is
closer to the gene that's causing the height difference. So let's fill in the rest of these. There we go, so
we see the same sort of thing here. What we see is, as you get further
away from the height gene, less variations explain. So when you're four centimorgans out, you're explaining about one
foot in difference in height. When you're a little bit closer,
explain 1.4, and when you're right on it, you're explaining almost too feet
of the height difference, okay? So the prediction is that we
see a stronger association when we are looking at markers closest
to the gene affecting the trait, which in this case is corn height. Now this has been done quite a bit. And this is often predicted using
what is referred to as a LOD plot. So, what they do is they use math, which we're not gonna cover this lecture,
to translate this observed and expected associations to identify a likely position
of genes affecting the trait of interest. So, in this case, this is looking at
various traits associated with tomato, and pH here is very well explained, and
you see looking across chromosome ten, there's an area here where there's
a lot of the variation of pH explained. There's areas where it's not. Typically speaking with LOD plots, a high number means more likely
a location for genes causing the effect. Often the cutoff of about three is used,
and if you see a LOD score above about a three, that means you see
a statistically significant association. So what this would actually
mean is they looked at markers at all these different places,
right? The markers aren't actually drawn on here,
and this one right here had a very strong difference between individuals
that were big P big P, and little p little p in terms of pH. This one had a weaker one,
this one had a weaker one, etcetera, so we infer that a gene affecting pH
is probably right around there. Okay, now it's an inference,
it's not an exactly pinpointing but it's an inference of likely location for
it. So how does this differ from when
we were mapping simple traits? Well, the big difference now is that we're
looking at markers in multiple regions of genome associated with trait and
a lot of marks explaining it. So this picture here is from a map of
QTLs that are associated with Drosophila mating success. As you can see,
there's a lot of these little peaks. This is a same sort of LOD
plot as I just showed you. So here, this is the X chromosome,
second chromosome, third chromosome. There are three different places
on the third chromosome, at least, maybe a fourth that are associated
with variation and mating success. These little triangles, that are a little
hard to see on the very bottom, those are actually
the locations of the markers. So we can infer that the association of
this marker right here is bigger, with the association with these markers here,
which is effectively negligible, okay? Same sort of thing here. Big association with this marker,
negligible with that one, relatively speaking. So you're inferring from this trajectory, where the likely positions are of
these genes affecting the trait. Now let me give you one to try. Infer the location of the QTL by
the trajectories of association here. This is a little bit, this is basically
the same principle as before. But what would you predict in this case? Here we have an association with A,
B, C and D. Hopefully, that wasn't too difficult for
you. What you saw is that A and
D had weaker associations than B and C. B and C had similar associations. So probably, as you're looking at this
trajectory to association strength, we see it getting stronger this way,
we see it getting stronger this way. So you probably infer that
the gene causing this height difference is probably
somewhere between B and C. That's the difference from
what we did before, right. In this case, it wasn't right at C, but
it was actually between two of them. So you might make a LOD plot that looks
something along the lines of this. I mentioned to you before, these things
are hypotheses, and there are dangers, you can actually be misled. Well let's imagine that we looked at
another gene right in the middle, another marker, we'll say it's marker T. What we expect is T should have a stronger
association with this trait than B or C. But what if we do that, and we see this? What does that imply? Well in this case,
adding the T marker in there, we see the T has a weaker
association than B or C. So, rather than having one
single large mapped effect, it looks like maybe we're potentially
mapping two different genes that have allelic variation
contributing to this. So maybe there's one near B and
one near C, rather than a single one near the middle. This happens quite a bit in
the course of genetic mapping. Something which looks like
one strong association, therefore a single gene
with a large defect. So you map a little bit more finely,
it ends up being, actually, there's a couple of different
genes in that same area. They just happen to be a little
bit close to each other. So we don't know what
makes the QTL effect. We see these effects in mapping,
and there are inferences of the locations of a factor, or factors,
that are contributing to this variation. There may be multiple genes that are close
together, or there may be a single gene. The reason I stress this, and this is very
important, the QTL mapping, whether it's by cross or pedigree or by population
association study, is not conclusive. It is a hypothesis of where one or
more genes are affecting the trait. And ultimately you have to go in and do
other techniques to confirm that is truly where there is a gene that has a allelic
variation contributing to this trait. Hope that was helpful. Thank you for joining us.