Hello and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. We've been talking about
the Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium and how, under certain conditions and only under
those conditions, you can calculate or estimate expected genotype frequencies
from observed allele frequencies. The opposite is always true. You can always know allele frequencies
from genotype frequencies. But you cannot always infer genotype
frequencies from allele frequencies. Now in the last example I showed you, the
last video we saw a case where there were fewer heterozygotes,
fewer of the Aa individuals, observed relative to what was
expected from Hardy-Weinberg. Now why might that be? Well this is gonna be the first of many
possible deviations from Hardy-Weinberg that we'll discuss. And it could be what's referred
to often as the Wahlund Effect. Well let's look at
a little bit of real data. Here's some real data from a Navajo
population at the MN blood groups. MN, just like big A and little a,
there's two alleles, M and N. There's three possible genotypes. MM, MN, and NN. So let's take a look at what we see
when we look at the Navajo of this particular group. Well, we can do the same tests for
Hardy-Weinberg we've done before. We figure out the total number of
individuals, 361 in this case. Get the genotype frequencies,
the true observed genotype frequencies. From them, say all of these plus half
of these, there are allele frequencies. So the frequency for big M is 0.971,
for big N it's 0.083. Take this squared, .841. 2 p q, so two times this times this. 0.152. 0.83 squared is 0.007. Now we see, this population's not
absolutely at Hardy-Weinberg, but it's very close, it's very close to
the Hardy Weinberg predicted frequencies. So let's look at another population now,
let's look at these Aborigine. Now again if we look at the MM
blood group in these individuals, let's follow the same procedure. I won't go through all the steps but
if you want some practice you can pause the slide, take these first set
of numbers and go through it yourself. We come back to again, a set of genotype
frequencies that are predicted, and they're very close to those observed. 0.031 is very close to 0.030. 0.293 versus 0.296.
.676 versus .674. It's within .003 for all of these things
of the expected genotype frequencies. Now let me ask you a funny question. What if you were an alien from
another planet, and you came down and you grabbed a bunch of Aborigine, and
you grabbed a bunch of Navaho, separately, and you put them all together into
the loading bay of your spaceship. You have this mixed population. So let's say it's exactly the same
individuals who are genotyped, and we saw the Aboregenie
are at Hardy-Weinberg. The Navajo were at Hardy-Weinberg. What happens when we
put all these together? Well, we get these allele frequencies for
M and N, but we get something that's
deviating rather dramatically from Hardy-Weinberg expectations
of the genotype frequencies. Look at that. This is dramatically different,
this is dramatically different, and this one as well. You notice especially, and this is what
I want to point out in particular, we expect almost half
the individuals to be heterozygote. We observe only about a quarter
of individual heterozygote. So there's a dramatic deficit
of heterozygotes in the observed relative to the expected. That's like the last example
from the last video. Now why might we see this? Why do we see this deviation? We have a Hardy-Weinberg population and
another Hardy-Weinberg population, why is it when we put them together
It's not a Hardy-Weinberg? What assumption have we deviated from? Well one big assumption we deviated
from the list I showed you earlier, was the assumption of random mating. The idea is that any two individuals
are as likely to breed as any other two individuals. Remember from the first
video from the series, that gametes just floating all around. It's not like that there
because the Navajo lady is not as likely to breed with an Aborigine
as she is with another Navajo. So imagine that in one
population big A is abundant. Then big A's are gonna be very
likely to encounter other big A's. In little population,
little As are very abundant. Little a's are gonna be very likely
to encounter other little A's. But big A's and little a's are very
unlikely during counter each other that's why you see this deficit of heterozygous. And then in this regard [NOISE] the
Hardy Weinberg assumption was violated. That Hardy Weinberg assumption was
not rejected within the Navajo, or within the Aborigine, but it deviates from this combined population
and this results from nonrandom mating. And importantly, this will very typically
result in having too few heterozygotes. We expected about half. We observed about a quarter. This pattern is referred
to as the Wahlund effect. This is when you sample
a cross population. So the populations within each
population may have random mating. But when you sample across or
between populations you get an under-representation of heterozygotes
relative to Hardy Weinberg. So this is a way for potentially
identifying different populations. You can see how much of
this deviation you see. We'll use that, actually, in a subsequent video for
calculations that are referred to as FST. But let me ask you
a different question first. Why does it matter? Why does it matter if something's
a Hardy Weinberg or not? Well in fact, the first step in
genome-wide association studies for genetic diseases, or any trait, is Is or
should be to test for Hardy Weinberg. Now why is that? Well, actually geno wide association
studies assume Hardy-Weinberg is true or assume that you're very very close to it. basically you're assuming that
there's linkage to this equilibrium. linkage to this equilibrium caused by
close proximity between marker alleles and disease causing alleles. Remember that fundamental
purpose of all genetic mappings to see an association
between genotype and phenotype. And we're hoping this association is from
close proximity or lack of recombination. So imagine that you see something like, where 20% of individuals with
AA genotypes have a disease. And 5% on individuals with
aa genotype have a disease. Then we're assuming there's
an association between the AA allele, or the AA genotype, or the A marker
gene more broadly, and the disease. But just being in different populations
also causes linkage disequilibrium. Let me give you an extreme
example to illustrate this point. Let's imagine that in Population 1,
every individual is AA. Okay? Just that simple. Imagine in Population 2,
every individual is aa. Now let's say that a disease
is a little more abundant in Population 1 than in Population 2. Okay? Would you say that AA individuals are more likely to have a disease
than aa individuals? The answer is yes, you would say this
because just the way it laid it out. Now this is actually a fake LD
between disease and the gene. Because the disease may not be on the same
chromosome as the A gene in particular, and in fact,
the disease may not even be genetic. Lets say, for example,
in population one every eats a lot, in population two everybody
has very good weight. You may see obesity is much more abundant
in population one than population two, but it may have nothing to do with
your genotype at the A gene. So its really important that you have true Hardy-Weinberg in doing
these genome wide association studies. Otherwise the associations you see may
have nothing to do with the genotypes you're observing. And the disease in fact not
even be genetic at all. Now punchline is if there are allele
frequency differences between populations at a SNP,
which is very often true. Let's say the SNP is
being used as a marker. And if disease incidence differences exists between the two populations you're
studying, which again, very often true. Sometimes for genetic reasons, sometimes
for not, but it may not have anything to do with the particular marker or anything
near that marker you're looking at. Then a genome-wide association
study will erroneously make it seem that a gene near the SNP is
causing or contributing to the disease. Now if you test for Hardy-Weinberg then
you can avoid this error because you can identify if you're looking at one
interbreeding population or not. Your hope is that the population is
at Hardy-Weinberg or is very, very, very close to being at Hardy-Weinberg. And then if you see an association
you know it's not this weird bias. Now, although it's very
important to test for Hardy–Weinberg, this is often not done. Here are excerpts from two
studies from not too long ago. This is from the American Journal
of Epidemiology 2006. The exclusion of studies in which
Hardy–Weinberg was violated changed the conclusions and changed the statistical significance
of gene-disease associations. That's scary. Think about it.
Millions of dollars go into finding these gene-disease associations. We really need to be carefull and
know that we're doing them right. Here's something from the European
Journal Human Genetics in 2005. Testing and reporting for Hardy–Weinberg
equilibrium is often neglected and deviations are rarely admitted
in the published reports. So this is a really big deal. There's other issues about interpreting
the deviations for Hardy-Weinburg. Let me show you an example here. So this is a real example where
a Hardy-Weinburg test was done, but interpreted incorrectly. This is raw data from a 2000
study of BRCA2 variants. These are from newborn males from
a hospital in the United Kingdom. Just as a little test here, I want you to
look, or I want you to do the math for this and figure out how close this
is to Hardy-Weinburg expectations. Do you see a particular kind of deviation? So try that out. Well hope that wasn't too hard,
let me go ahead and show you the answers, these are the numbers you should have
come up with, so these are the two. Genotype frequencies. These are the true allele frequencies. These are the Hardy Weinberg
expected genotype frequencies. What we see here is our expected
frequency of the heterozygote is 0.4, our observed was .36. So there is, or there at least seems
to be, some slight deviation for Hardy Weinberg, and in this
direction of too few heterozygotes. This was, by the way,
statistically significant, too. Interestingly, how did
the authors interpret this? The authors of the study interpreted
it as that the Aa individuals are less healthy than AA or aa. They postulated that maybe
there was some disease or there was some problem
associated with Aa individuals. In fact,
there is a much simpler explanation. That we're looking at newborn males
in a hospital in the United Kingdom. It's quite likely, imagine this is
a hospital in a place like London. It's quite likely that
in a place like London, there's a lot of subdivision
of the population. That people of say, Indian descent are probably more likely to
have kids with others of Indian descent. People from the Far East may be more
likely to have kids with people from the Far East. People who, who are of European decent
are probably more likely to have kids with others of European decent. Yes there are cases where people will have
kids with people from other ethnic groups. But by having this tendency there,
overall the population, which undoubtedly exists,
you will get exactly this pattern. It's basically the simpler explanation
than the Aa individuals are less healthy, is that there's a little bit of a Wahlund
effect there, but that wasn't considered. It probably didn't take our pop gen class. Now let me close with
a little ironic tidbit. This is a quote from Hardy's 1940 book. This is when he was about 62. His book is called
A Mathematician's Apology. I definitely recommend it. It's a very interesting read about
the elegance and beauty of math. He said,
I have never done anything useful. No discovery of mine has made or
is likely to make, directly or indirectly, for good or ill, the least
difference to the amenity of the world. I would like to say very strongly,
he was very wrong on this. This Hardy-Weinburg idea,
which he helped bring about and he helped popularize,
really has made a huge impact. We're continuing to see it now
even literally more than a hundred years after the original publications
of the Hardy-Weinburg work. We still see these applications for things
like genome-wide association studies. The kinds of things he
never would have imagined. So this is really cool stuff, even
though this was written when he was 62, and he was lamenting the waning
of his mathematical ability, he really did a lot for the world. As did, of course,
Weinberg and Castle, thank you.