Hello.
And welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. Now, we'll start tying in some of the
things that we've talked about in previous videos about inheritance
of multiple genes. So, alleles of multiple genes at one time,
with recombination, and specifically crossing over, to get
to the principle of genetic mapping. How do we actually find genes related to
diseases or other traits of interest? So let's get started. So what is genetic mapping? Well mapping, simply put, is using associations between alleles
at multiple spots in the genome, spots in the genome are referred to
as loci, to do one of two things. So either we determine where
a gene is relative to other genes. So for example, in the case we were doing
before with the Drosophila mutations, we were looking to see where is the cinnabar eye color gene
relative to the vestigial wing gene. Or we may be trying to localize
a gene that is causing a phenotype. So we may be, for example, trying to find
where is the gene that is related to diabetes predisposition or
cancer predisposition. And this, again,
is often done in the context of cancer. So, this was one of
the primary driving forces for the human genome project,
a little bit over a decade ago. That we wanted to be able to map
genetic diseases in the human genome, once the sequence was obtained. Now, the goal from this was to basically
find a way to find these genes faster and easier than could have
been done in the past. So what they did is they essentially made
this catalog of all 20,000 human genes. This was a huge undertaking. Because in order to do this they had
to assemble 3 billion bases of DNA into order. So just going along chromosome 1, and
saying the sequence is ATTAGACCC. That's actually exactly it. No, I'm just kidding. [LAUGH] They essentially had to assemble
the sequence along these long chromosomes. And again, it's 3 billion bases of DNA. So this was a massive
international undertaking. But they were able to do it, and they were able to come up with the first
draft human genome around 2001 or so. And they sorted these along
with 23 pairs of chromosomes. This shows you what some of
the chromosomes look like in a karyotype. Now, people thought, when you talk
to the general public they say, well, we have the whole
human genome sequenced, so don't you know where all the genes
are that are associated with disease? Well, there's a problem there. And this is something I really want to
emphasize because it's a common source of misunderstanding. It's not easy to go from DNA
sequence to disease-causing gene. Because the DNA sequence
looks something like this. ATGGCGAGCTAG, etc etc. It's not labeled, I cause cancer. [LAUGH] It doesn't scream out to you that,
here's a gene that's important for this, or even, is this necessarily
a protein-coding gene at all. So, we can get some guesses, or
some hypotheses, of normal functions of genes from a sequence, but we can only
guess what sequences may cause problems. That's why we have to go through this
somewhat arduous task of genetic mapping. Now, genetic mapping is
very much a first approach. It is not conclusive. You can't just map a disease,
and, oh, there it is, done. And say that's the basic cause. It's definitely the start
of looking into this. And what's happening when you're doing
genetic mapping, this is very much like what happened with our Drosophila examples
from previous lecture, where identifying the location of disease mutations
relative to other spots in the genome. These other spots are the genetic
markers we talked about. So these are essentially
reference points in the genome. And if you have a fully assembled genome
sequence, then you know, for example, the reference point of this marker is at
essentially base 1342 on chromosome three. Right, so that gives you
a reference point, so along this, if I know it's this way from that
marker and that way from that marker, I can localize and say, okay it's
between base 1342 and base 20,346,655. You can basically narrow it down where in
the genome these things are relative to genetic markers. And again, the principle is very similar to what
we did with the Drosophila mutation. So how do we get genetic markers? Well, again, this is where we can leverage
some of the resources that came about partly as a result of
the human genome sequence, that multiple people were used for
the first, original human genome sequence. And we've had many, many, many more human genome sequences since
that first one that came out around 2001. And what happened in doing this is
you can compare nucleotide sites. You can basically put
the sequences together and say, well here is a stretch of
sequence from one individual. Here's a stretch of sequence
from another individual. And look, there's a few bases that we
see are different between individuals. Any pair of individuals will have
a couple of base differences. As long as they're not necessarily
identical twins, for example. So here we can say, well this is
a difference, this is a difference. We can use those as
potential genetic markers. Now these particular sites are referred
to as single nucleotide polymorphisms. Single because it's one base, nucleotide
because it is one of those bases of DNA. Polymorphisms means
a variation within the genome. So poly for many, morph for form. So, single nucleotide polymorphism. This is often just abbreviated as SNPs. So it's a nice, catchy sort of term. [LAUGH] Anyway, what we can do is we can,
using blood or spit or something like that. This is what they use for some of those DNA tests I talked
about in an earlier video. We can genotype blood or
tissue for these SNP markers and use them as reference points. So we can use this as a marker and then try to map a disease
relative to this base. Use this as another marker and try to
map the disease relative to that base. And maybe we can say it's between them or
off to this side or off to that side, etc. So what resources do we have? Well we have many. So, first and foremost, we now have the
genome sequence mostly put together from end to end on each chromosome in humans. Now I'm emphasizing this case, humans. The same principle of genetic mapping
can be applied to any organism. Now we have, in the case of humans, we have 23 long sequences
corresponding to the chromosome. There are some areas that
are not very well assembled, and there are some potential errors in there,
but this is a very strong starting point. We also have computer
generated predictions for what parts are likely genes encoding for
proteins. So again,
the sequence is just like A-C-A-A-T-G-G-G. It doesn't tell you, this part is relevant
for making a protein, this part is not. But, we can generate predictions, though,
from computer algorithms for doing this. And last, but far from least, we have data showing some bases that
differ between a lot of humans. This is referred to as the HapMap project. Where we know a lot of
particular sites in the genome, just like in the previous slide. Let me go back one. Just like in the previous slide,
we have a lot of these mapped out, where some individuals have A and
some individuals have G. So, a lot of those are known, and we can leverage this last set as
genetic markers when mapping diseases. Now, ultimately the essence of
genetic mapping is to look for an association between genotype,
or marker alleles, and phenotype, or, for example,
a disease of interest. If you tend to see an individual that has
an A base at site tends to have a disease, then it's likely that A base is
either the disease-causing gene or at least very close to it. It is linked to it,
like we talked about last time, okay? So, again, this is just showing you
what I just discussed a second ago. We have the genome sequence
just like the stretch of bases. We have predicted genes, and
we have this HapMap SNP, these single nucleotide polymorphisms. So these are the ones that
we use as genetic markers. And these are, in essence,
this difference between individuals, are basically the same thing like what
we were talking about with big B and little b like with Mendel's peas, those
are caused by these sorts of differences. Again, all genetic mapping comes down to
seeing an association between genotype, alleles at particular markers, and your
phenotype, which is the trait of interest. I can't say that enough times. But that is what genetic mapping is. And that is how you are able to find,
along this whole stretch of sequence, where are the genes that are associated
with trait differences or disease predisposition. Here's an extreme example. Let's say that we wanted to map
a recessive genetic disease, let's say, it's sickle cell anemia for example. Let's say that we're trying to map it
relative to two genetic markers, A and B. Let's say at each of these genetic
markers they have two forms, big A and little a at the A locus, big B and
little b at the B locus, okay? So you crossed two individuals. You don't actually cross humans,
but let's just pretend. You crossed two individuals. One of them is a carrier for
sickle cell anemia and is heterozygous for these markers. So this individual is big A,
little a, big B, little b. We also have this person have kids
with somebody who has the disease, so may have sickle cell anemia, so little a
little a, little b little b in this case. Let's say you get this set of offspring. So this first one is AaBb, and is okay. Next one is Aabb and is diseased. aaBb and is okay. aabb and is diseased. So take a moment, look at this for
just a few minutes here. And think about what would you conclude? Whether the A marker or the B marker
is closer to the disease mutation. Now remember we don't assume
that it is the disease mutation. We're just saying it's linked to it,
one of these may be linked to it. So think about it, would it be
the A marker, B marker, both, or neither? Well, I hope that one
wasn't too difficult. Again, the essence of all
genetic mapping is looking for an association between genotype and
phenotype. So let's look at the two
genes in isolation here. Let's look at the A gene
versus the B gene. And that's the easiest way
to see what's going on. So when you're looking at the A gene,
what's going on? When you're,
we have two possible genotypes. We have Aa, all right, so the top two
are Aa, and the bottom two are aa. Do we see any sort of
consistent association? That if you're a Aa you
tend to be diseased, or if you're aa you tend not to be,
or something like that? No, we see half the Aas are okay, half of them are diseased, half of the aa
ones are okay, half of them are diseased. So there's no association with A. So A is not associated with this genetic
disease or not clearly associated with it. What about B? Well in this case,
Bbs are okay, bb is diseased. Bb is okay, bb is diseased. This very much suggests that
B is linked to the disease, and specifically the little b allele,
individuals that are bb, tend to be the ones that get this disease. This would suggest that the little b
allele is actually associated with some sort of disease-causing
mutation in this instance. So we'll elaborate on this quite
a bit more in subsequent videos. But I hope you find this exercise useful. Thank you.