Hello.
Welcome back to Introduction to Genetics and Evolution. In the previous set of videos, we've been talking about
deviations from Hardy-Weinberg. Particularly, not in the last video but
the video before it, we looked at the measurement of FST, how you can measure differences between
populations in the allele frequencies. What we saw, in this case, it that you use the deficiency
of heterozygotes to quantify a deviation from Hardy-Weinberg to look
at these differences between populations. These differences between populations,
as I emphasized both in the last video and the one before it,
come from nonrandom mating. In this video, I'm gonna talk about
a different from of nonrandom mating, that of inbreeding, or
mating preferentially with individuals more closely related to you than
a random individual in the population. Now, differences in allele frequencies are
often driven by patterns of gene flow or interbreeding, this is
differences among populations. This is true when you're
looking between populations but it doesn't have to be true
just between populations. In fact, you can see something similar
with patterns of nonrandom mating within populations, as well. So the related concept of what
we've talked about is inbreeding. Now this is again, breeding between
closely related individuals such as siblings, cousins,
things like that. This often happens because the capacity
for dispersal is often limited. Individuals can't just jump to some place
on their side of the population but they breed with individuals that happen
to be physically approximate to them. To quote a famous song,
they love the one they're with. Now, this changes the distribution
of alleles among genotypes. So let's start by looking at
an extreme form of inbreeding. This extreme form of inbreeding
is that of self-fertilization, which is found in some plants. They actually literally have their
pollen is fertilizing their seeds. So let's imagine this population. We'll start at Hardy-Weinberg,
that you have 25 % AA, 50% Aa, 25% aa. What happens if this particular
plant self-fertilizes, as you might see in the picture here? Well, the AA individuals will obviously
produce more AA individuals because that's all they have. It's AA crossed to AA, aa individuals
will produce more aa individuals but these ones, the heterozygotes,
will make a spread. They'll make some Aa individuals, they'll
make some aa ones, and some AA ones. So we take this 50%, as it shows here,
and a quarter of it goes to AA, a quarter of it goes to aa, and
half of it stays within there. So if we're to look at the new
genotype frequencies after one generation of self-fertilization,
we see it becomes 25% AA, plus one quarter of 50% AA, so
that comes out to 37.5% AA. Same on this side, this one is 50% Aa,
times 1.5, so it would be 25% Aa. You can add these up now, it still
adds up to 100% but what do we see? We see, again, a reduction in heterozygotes
relative to what we saw previously. Now, we could iterate this over more and
more generations. Now we have again fewer heterozygotes,
more of these two homozygotes until, in the very long term, what do you expect? If you just keep self-fertilizing over and
over again, what do you think will happen? That's right! The answer is you'll have all AAs or
all aas. They're essentially inbreeding and
particularly self-fertilization but any form of inbreeding eliminates
heterozygotes if you do it for a very long period of time,
there will be no heterozygotes left. So every generation,
the heterozygote fraction goes down and you essentially create these
pure breeding lines of AA or aa. Now how do we quantify inbreeding? Again, inbreeding, even if you're not
looking at selfing, reduces percent heterozygotes relative to Hardy–Weinberg
or just Mendelian proportions. It feeds alleles into homozygotes,
and again, this reduction can be used to quantify the extent of inbreeding
that's happening in the actual population. A measure we can use, and this is
all gonna look very familiar to you, the measure that we can use is
Wright's inbreeding coefficient, which is often just abbreviated as F. F ranges from 0 to 1 where 0 is your
at Hardy-Weinberg expectation for percent of heterozygotes
within the population. If you're between 0 and 1, you have somewhat fewer heterozygotes
than predicted and if you have an F of 1, it means you have no heterozygotes
in the population at all. This sounds very familiar, doesn't it? It's very similar to FST. Again, F is calculated as
the Hardy-Weinberg predicted 2pq minus the observed heterozygotes over
the Hardy-Weinberg predicted 2pq. So let's do an example. Here is an example right here. Let's say you're studying a population
that has this set of genotypes, so again, we use the same procedure
we always use for calculating if something
is at Hardy-Weinberg. We get the totals, the genotype
frequencies, and allele frequencies. The total in this case is 1,000,
here's your genotype frequencies, here's your allele frequencies 0.7 and
0.3. From this, we see what the Hardy-Weinberg
predicted genotype frequency should be. In this case, we have 0.49, 0.42, 0.09. Look at that, we see that things
are at Hardy-Weinberg or not. Here's the predicted
percent heterozygotes, here's the observed
fraction of heterozygotes. Again, we have a deficit of
the observed relative to the expected. So we just plug these numbers in,
the expect is 0.42 minus the observed is 0.294, divide by 0.42 and
our F in this case happens to be 0.3. That's pretty severe inbreeding. Let me give you one to try yourselves. These are genotypes from
the Croatian Islands. This is actually real data. I skipped the step of
the genotype counts for you. I'm just going to go ahead and
start with the genotype frequencies. Go ahead and give that a shot. I hope that wasn't too difficult. Again, I started you off with the genotype
frequencies, let's go ahead and convert them to allele frequencies. There we go 0.9 and 0.1 and from that
we calculate the expected heterozygote frequency, so it would be 0.9 times 0.1
times 2 should be 0.18 as your 2pq, I'll write that in there just so
you see it, 2pq is equal to 0.18. So this is our predicted,
this is our observed. So our predicted minus
observed over predicted. In this case,
the estimated inbreeding coefficient for these Croatian islands is 0.04. Now you may be wondering, what is the difference between
this inbreeding F and FST? They're both based on
fundamentally the same principle. They're seeing fewer heterozygotes
than the Hardy-Weinberg prediction. They're both indicating
patterns of nonrandom mating. One is indicating within two different
populations that are individually Hardy-Weinberg. The other is indicating behavior
within a population and they're both essentially
the symptom of the Wahlund effect. Now this is where the difference comes in,
you apply the inbreeding F when you know you're looking at individuals
within a single population. As far as you can tell, these individuals could freely interbreed
with each other but perhaps don't. You apply FSTs when you are quantifying
a difference between populations. You're looking at individuals from here
and individuals from way over there, and you're then trying to estimate,
historically, what has happened. How different are they in allele
frequencies that you wanna quantify. So how is this calculation used? Particularly, the inbreeding F. I have here just a couple of examples from
some recent papers that were published. These are just their titles. You can look at the association between
inbreeding and health or disease. Many of you know that inbreeding is
also associated with health problems. So there's one here, inbreeding effects
on fetal growth in Beirut, Lebanon. You can look at patterns of gene flow
between say social classes to get sort of societal implications of this. So this marriage within social or occupational class boundaries in
Pakistan and how it affects inbreeding. You can look at other cultural effects and
patterns of breeding. So here's one from Spain where they're
looking at socioeconomic, demographic and geographic influences. Patterns of inbreeding around the world
differ, often associated with cultures. This shows the global distribution of
marriages between couples that are related as either as second cousins or
more closely related then second cousins. If you have a second cousin mating,
then F would be on average 0.0156. Here we see that there are some
areas where you have a lot of marriages among related individuals,
so as you see here in Saudi Arabia and Afghanistan, and
things like that you see a lot. There are some areas where you see very,
very little of it. For example, in the United States,
in Australia, in Russia, things like that. Again, inbreeding does happen and
it varies socially and culturally. Now, some of you may be thinking,
isn't inbreeding bad? You've heard of all this inbreeding
depression and things like that. In and of itself, inbreeding only changes the distribution
of alleles among genotypes. Intrinsically, inbreeding
doesn't cause a problem. It's only changing how alleles are
distributed among the various genotypes. It does not make any alleles go away or
turn bad. However, there is this phenomenon
of inbreeding depression and what this requires is natural
selection as well as inbreeding. Now the reason that inbreeding is often
associated with this sort of depression, is that populations often have many
individually rare recessive mutations. We talked about this way back with
our mutation lecture, that again, you have a few new detrimental
mutations arising each generation. If they're recessive, as they often are, most bad mutations tend to be recessive,
they don't really have any effect. But what starts happening,
imagine that the rarer recessive, you're gonna have very
homozygotes in the population but what starts happening if you
have related individuals mate? If you have related individuals mate and
have kids, they're likely to have the same recessive mutation and they're more
likely to produce homozygous offspring. So this picture on the bottom might
show you individual genotypes across the population and let's say
that each of these red mutations is bad. There's a bad D over here, there's a bad A
over here, there's a bad D way over here, a bad E over here, a bad B there. It's very unlikely, pretty much these
people could all mate with each other and there's only one combination here among
all these individuals that would actually produce a problem. If they're all recessive and that
would be if this individual right here interbred with this
individual right there. In contrast, if they're breeding, for
example, they're self fertilizing or breeding with their sisters or
cousins, then you're much more likely to accidentally run into
somebody who has that same bad mutation. Therefore to actually have this mutation
effect show up because your making it homozygous, that's why you
have inbreeding depression. It's this combination of inbreeding,
plus rare recessive mutations. We see effects of this often
associated with dog breeds, and the inbreeding associated with making
them that we're breeding relatives to make these various dog breeds. We're trying to essentially pick
the desirable qualities we like, their behavior, the way they look,
or something like that. In doing that, when we're breeding
individuals that are related to each other, we end up increasing
the inbreeding coefficient. In fact, inbreeding coefficient in
some dogs can be as high as 0.5. That's unusual but
some of them do go that high. In fact, there's some poodle varieties
that have an F of 0.7, that is huge. At this point, you're seeing almost no
heterozygotes retained within there. A UPenn study showed that 75% of puppies
that have a F greater than 0.67 die within 10 days. So there's a huge detrimental
effect associated with this. Some of the effects that
have been documented are, for example, King Charles spaniels. They get this, I don't know how
you pronounce it, syringomyelia. Essentially, the dog's skull
is too small for its brain. It causes, as you can imagine,
all sort of problems. Here are several others. Boxers tend to get high epilepsy. Pugs have breathing problems. Bulldogs can't mate or
give birth unassisted. Some, not obviously all of them. Mastiffs, Saint Bernards, and Great Danes,
this is a very common one, hip dysplasia. Hip dysplasia's been studied quite
a bit in a couple of contexts, such as the Icelandic sheep dogs. Let me show you some data about that. Here is the association of incidence
of hip dysplasia with inbreeding. So on the Y axis here, we have percent
of individuals having hip dysplasia. On the X axis, we have inbreeding
coefficient associated with them. What we see here, is we see a greater and greater incidence of hip dysplasia
associated with more and more inbreeding. Again, the problem here is you're
making recessive mutations homozygous. By making them homozygous, you're making their bad effect
visible in the individual. That's what causes inbreeding depression. That's one of the reasons
we're interested in it. Thank you so much for your time.