Hello!
And welcome back to Introduction to Genetics and Evolution. In this video I'll be talking
about some basic processes for getting genetic material into new cells. So the two processes I'll be
emphasizing in this mini video are mitosis and meiosis. I'm not gonna talk about
these in extensive detail. There's a lot of molecular parts to it, there's a lot of stages to it that
I'm not really going to emphasize. I mostly just want you to understand
these in the context of ploidy. Ploidy refers to the number of complete copies of genetic
information in your cells. So you may remember in a previous video,
I referred to most animals being diploid. D-I-ploid. Di stands for two. So most animals, just like you, have two copies of their
complete genetic code in their cells. One that came from mom,
one that came from dad. And that's why you're diploid. So let's talk about these two
processes in the context of ploidy. The first process we'll discuss briefly,
is mitosis. Mitosis happens when you
have the division of cells into two cells that are genetically
identical to each other, and to the parent cell that gave rise to them. So again, this is a process that
produces two diploid daughter cells genetically identical to
a single parent diploid cell. This happens inside
your body all the time. When you're growing new skin cells,
the genetic material is passed from the old cells into these new cells
through the process of mitosis. So this is essential all the time
through growth and development. Now this also presumes that if
you have no new mutations, we'll come back to this in just a second, if you
have no new mutations, basically every cell in your body should be identical to
the original fertilized egg that you were. So if you go back,
way back in time when you were originally one new fertilized egg,
the genetic information in there, if it was not altered, would be true
in all your current cells today. So let me ask the question, what would happen if we did
have a mutation during mitosis? A mutation is a change
in the genetic code. What would happen if that
happened sometime during mitosis? Let's say when you're
at the 16 cell stage. And one of the cells suddenly had
some error in the genetic code. Where something changed moving on there. What would happen is you produced
what's referred to as a genetic mosaic. This shows you a picture of
a flower that is a genetic mosaic. Where there was a genetic change
that happened in the cells leading to this half of the flower relative to
those leading to that half of the flower. So there are different cells
here that have a change in the genetic code from the others. Now mutations in mitosis control genes
have been known to be associated with various cancers, so this is often
a very bad thing when it happens. So let's talk about the other
process of splitting genetically. Let's talk about meiosis. Meiosis in contrast to
mitosis produces haploid, or one, genetic copy daughter cells
from a parent diploid cell. Okay so this is typically
associated with the formation of gametes such as when you are making
sperm or eggs in your body. So you start off with you know all your
cells having two copies of all genetic information, but then you basically
lose one copy that then gets and the other copy is what
goes into your gamete. This is typically the precursor
to fertilization. This is what allows it such that when
they have kids they also have two copies. And fertilization is what
brings together the gametes of two parents into an offspring. So you have these single
copies with 1N meiotic gametes coming together to make a new 2N,
having two copies, diploid cell. Which would be you for
example or your kid. Again, half of genetic material is
from mom, half is from the dad. So we have this sort of union and
this picture diagrams it pretty well. Imagine this is a compliment
chromosomes from dad, here's a compliment of
chromosomes from mom. You see that in the offspring we have two
copies of the blue, two copies of the red, two copies of the green, etc. Now, what would happen if you got two copies of a chromosome from one parent
and then got a third copy from the other? What would happen if they didn't
split as much as it should. Well, the answer is not very good. You typically end up with
some fairly extreme disease. One of the most minor of
these would be Down Syndrome. This is when you have three
copies of chromosome 21. Others are Klinefelter Syndrome, etc. Often when this happens,
the offspring is inviable and never makes it past
a couple of cells large. Now let me give you a fictional example,
and then I'll ask you a question after that to see if you've
understood what I've said so far. Let's imagine that you're messing with
your microwave, microwaves are not as dangerous as I'm going to portray this to
be, so you're messing with this microwave, a lightening bolt strikes your house,
and all the sudden this big bolt of radiation shoots out of
the microwave onto your face. And you grow a third eye. [LAUGH] This would never actually happen,
but lets say the cells in
your face were effected. Now, these cells that have
been changed in some way. Would these cells spread by mitosis? Remember, their in your head,
were they spread by mitosis? Could they spread by meiosis? And would you be likely to pass on the
affected cells to your offspring or not? So I'm gonna ask you
these three questions, and we'll see if you understood from that. Welcome back. I hope you understood
the answers to those questions. The answers,
let me just briefly go over them. They could certainly spread by mitosis. Because again, mitosis is just what
happens when your cells are making new copies of other cells. So you're going 2n to 2n. In your head you're probably replacing
skill cells all the time and they're making new ones. And if there's a mutated
cell here it might spread to other spots on your forehead right there. It is very improbable that these
cells would spread by meiosis, because you're not usually
making gametes in your head. [LAUGH] You may think you are,
but you're not. And because of that, it's also very
unlikely you would ever pass on the affected cells to your offspring,
okay? So, let's just recap real
quick what's happening. So, with mitosis, again this is the process that's typically
associated with growth within your body. You start off in this fictional example,
here there's only a single chromosome, but there's two copies of it. This is one that came from dad,
one that came from mom. Before it actually replicates there's,
I'm sorry before it actually passes on to the new cell there
is a period of replication. So you actually go through
a very short 4n end stage. We actually have four
copies of everything. Two from dad, two from mom. The two copies that are there,
these are called chromatids. They are identical. Just two copies of your mom's single copy, two copies of your dad's
dad's single copy. Eventually, you get down to these
daughter cells that are just like the original cell. They are identical to
the original ones there. We have one copy of your dad's,
one copy of your mom's genes. And it's just passed on over and
over again. So, mitosis, you start at 2n,
you end at 2n. And you have exactly the same genetic
complement in the beginning as in the end, assuming there's no new mutation. With meiosis, this is what's typically
associated with gamete formation. Again, you start with this same 2n part. But here in this case you
actually produced 1n copy. So you're actually passing on only half
of your genetic information to your kids. You're not passing on all
of the genetic material. And this works out, so that the kid at the
end has two copies because it has the one that came from you, and it has
the one that came from your partner. So 2n to 1n is what you
typically see with meiosis. Now this is an important part. Meiosis is fundamental to
understanding inheritance. So this is what we're gonna focus on for
most of the rest of the lecture. I hope you'll join us, thank you.