Hello, and welcome back to Introduction
to Genetics and Evolution. Now, we've talked about various
evolutionary forces so far, and particularly emphasized two of them,
natural selection, and genetic drift. Now, a common question for people who
are studying patterns of molecular evolution is, do particular genes
evolve primarily as a result of the action of natural selection,
or genetic drift? And how many genetic differences that
we see between species were driven by selection or drift? Well there are several challenges
in trying to search for the signatures of natural selection and
individual genes. And infer the historical
processes that operated on them. In this set of videos,
we're be looking at this, particularly in the context of
the gene changes that make us human. So what we'll do is we'll compare human
sequences to those of our closest living relatives,
which are chimpanzees, depicted here. Now nucleotide variation exists
within species and between species. In this illustration we
have a stretch of sequence, it's about maybe 15 bases long or so. We have three variable sites. This first variable site shows
a fixed difference between species. Meaning all individuals of
Species 1 differ at that nucleotide site from all
individuals of Species 2. So all of Species 1 have a C,
all of Species 2 have a G. The second one shows
variation within Species 1, where some individuals are G and
some are A, whereas Species 2 doesn't have any variation and nucleotide
site 3, we have exactly the opposite. There's variation within Species 2,
there's one individual that has a G, whereas all individuals in
Species 1 are the same. We see this variation,
how do we interpret it? Well the big question is how much of the
variation that you see within species, or between species, is neutral, and primarily
evolving by this process of genetic drift? And how much of it is selected, or
can we identify any that seemed to have experienced some sort
of natural selection? Well, there's two schools of thought,
as I mentioned before. There's sort of the neutralist
school of thought, that most of the variation that you
see in between species is neutral, and is evolving by
the action of genetic drift. So if a mutation arises, its probability of eventual fixation
is equal to its allele frequency. It bebops around, maybe it's lost,
maybe it's fixed. In contrast, there is the selectionist, that's just the very little of the
nucleotide variation that we see within or between species is neutral,
that actually, most of it is selected. So the big question for
us then, is what makes humans, or you could look at any focal species,
special? Well if you look historically, the human genome sequence
was first published in 2003. It was available a few years before that. The chimpanzee genome sequence,
that was published in 2005. And if you look at these genome sequences,
they're very similar. On average,
98.7% of the nucleotides match up. Now what evolutionary biologists want
to do is to look at specific genes and say, for this particular gene it seems like there's
primarily evolving by genetic drift. And therefore, those changes are,
in terms of fitness, irrelevant. And others that seemed to evolve
primarily by natural selection, and thus may be important. It may actually, those ones that
are important, may be contributing to what makes us particularly unique and different
from our common ancestor with chimpanzee. Now 98.7% nucleotides sounds like
we're very similar, however, given our genome size is about 3.1 billion
bases, we're actually different by about 47 million nucleotide sites,
so that's quite a few. Let me introduce to you the Neutral Theory
of Molecular Evolution. This was popularized through
the writings of Motoo Kimura. Now he suggested that most mutations
that you actually observe, most mutations that get abundant and that eventually get fixed within
a species, have no effect on fitness. So essentially they're
arising by mutation and then they're bebopping around just
randomly, due to these stochastic forces, and they're spreading by genetic drift or
maybe immediately getting lost. It's actually by genetic drift. They are not spreading
by natural selection. Now, he doesn't argue against bad
mutations, he is perfectly comfortable with the idea that some mutations
are bad and immediately get eliminated. But that most of
the variation that you see tends to not have any
particular effect on fitness. There's a corollary from this,
that if this is what is happening within the species, then we expect most of the
nucleotide differences between species. And once it differentiates
between species one and species two presumably also spread by
drift rather than spreading by selection. Now this, for many decades,
has served as a null hypothesis. One we are essentially testing,
we are looking at genome sequences or individual gene sequences. Now, what the theory doesn't do is, it doesn't say that all
mutations are neutral. It very much acknowledges that there
certainly are adapted mutations. Nobody, no neutralist would ever argue
that a camel's hump is neutral or anything like that, and
obviously there's a genetic basis for it. It also, as I mentioned,
it acknowledges common bad mutations. But again, that variation that you see,
that variation that becomes abundant or eventually fixed, tends to have little or
no effect on fitness. So the variation that you see within or
between species. And some people really don't buy this. There was a paper published
in 2008 by Matt Hahn, and he suggested the patterns apparent for multiple species at multiple loci make
the case for rampant nonneutrality. So he suggests, and many others agree,
that in fact, there's very little of the genome that's evolving purely
by the action of genetic drift. However, many, but not all, human
pseudogenes appear to evolve neutrally. Pseudogenes are these things that used to
be, historically, some sort of gene, but they essentially are no longer functional, they're just relics that
are found in our genome. Now the great question again, for us, is
how do we tell which of these forty seven million bases that differ
between humans and chimps, evolved this difference by drift or
evolved it by selection. Are they important or are they random? Or there's a simple thing you could
try to do, though it won't work, and that's just basically look at those
areas that are most different. Basically, pick those genes that
are most different between humans and chimps and say, well those were
probably the ones that were important. So you could do something like this,
instead of looking at genes, looking at a million bases at a time. There's some stretches between humans and
chimps that differ by more than 2% and others that differ by less than 1%. The problem is, just because there's more of a difference,
doesn't mean selection is involved. Now you can see there's
a full distribution here, so some of these might have very
large differences purely by chance, some may have very small
differences purely by chance. Not all base differences are important and we can't just count them
all exactly the same, okay? Just to illustrate with you what
I showed a second ago here, thisis sequence differences
looking along a chromosome. So this is the human chimp divergence or
difference in sequence. You see there's a couple of peaks here
that are potentially interesting, there's a lot of values as well. There is an interesting
correlation of this with recombination rate that we
talked about elsewhere. But again, not all sequences matter. As I mentioned, base changes in
pseudogenes potentially don't matter, because they're not coating any protein. I also introduced introns back in
one of the first genetics videos. These do not contribute
to the final amino acids. Even though the sequence
is found within the gene, they don't contribute to the final
amino acid sequence and, therefore, don't affect the protein. So intron sequences are often thought
to have no effect on phenotype, not always, but often. Another set of sequences that may
not matter so much are these codon third-position changes, or specifically
any change that's referred to synonymous. Basically there are multiple codon
sequences, multiple triplets in the DNA and then eventually in the RNA, that
will make exactly the same amino acid. So looking at this AGA encodes
the amino acid serine. AGC encodes the amino acid serine. AGG encodes serine, etc. So we see this, even though we're
changing that third nucleotide in this stretch here,
it doesn't actually change the amino acid. And that's frequently true for
these codon third-positions. In contrast, the second-position
always changes the amino acid. So you see this triplet code AGA, so let's
change that from AGA, which was serine, to AAA, that's phenylalanine,
ACA which is cysteine, ATA is tyrosine. So those are always nonsynonymous. If you're changing the amino acid, you're necessarily changing
something about the protein, right? So there is a high probability that
a lot of these nonsynonymous changes can affect fitness. In contrast, if you're not changing
the amino acid, then it's more likely, though not certain, that you're not actually affecting
the final protein in any detectable way. And these may be closer to neutral. Now nonsynonymous differences,
I said, affect the protein. And these nonsynonymous differences
in coding DNA will make a different amino acid stuck into the protein and
they are likely to affect the phenotype. Now, just because it's having an effect, doesn't tell you
the direction of the effect. These nonsynonymous differences
may be detrimental, right? They may be bad if the original
protein was better. So when you have a mutation
from AGA to ATA, that may make the protein in some
way unstable, and make it so you're not producing something you
were supposed to be producing well. They may be neutral. Even though it is changing an amino acid, it may not actually affect the protein's
function or structure in a noticeable way, aside from the fact that it is just
a different amino acid in there. Or it may even be advantageous. Maybe this new protein,
maybe it's better to have AAA than AGA, the amino acid associated
with [INAUDIBLE]. So these nonsynonymous differences can be
detrimental, neutral, or advantageous. In contrast, synonymous differences
are presumed, in general, to be neutral or close to neutral. They're not effecting the phenotype. Now what we want to do, as evolutionary
geneticists, is to bin these changes. We want to, we have our three bins here,
positive selection, negative selection, and neutral. So, some of these gene changes that
don't matter, they're neutral, we'll toss them into this bin. Many of the gene changes are going to be
bad, so selection will prevent them from ever becoming abundant to the population
or going to fixation, going to 100%. So they'll go into what's referred
to as the negative selection bin, or purifying selection. Basically, this is the full
set of mutations that are bad, that are quickly held at low frequency in
the population and ultimately eliminated. So that's the negative selection bin. And then we have the occasional
gene changes that are good, right? These are ones that will be
captured by natural selection and potentially spread all
the way to fixation, to 100%. So these are positively selected. So we want to bin each of these in there. We want to know how much there
is within and between species. Well let me ask you a question first. Among these different things,
if all base changes were neutral, would we expect there to be more
synonymous differences between species or nonsynonymous differences? If all base changes were neutral,
if it didn't matter if you were AAA, or ACA, or AAT,
which do you think would be more abundant? Well, the answer there
may have surprised you. That in fact,
there are actually more potential nonsynonymous changes than there
are synonymous changes between species. If we assumed all base
changes were neutral. Well let's explore this for a minute. Now first, well let's think
about what's happening here. When we're looking at
differences between species, then a mutation has to have
arisen within an ancestor, and has to have spread and that's why it's
creating this difference between species. So if species one has
A at a particular site, species two has T at a particular site,
let's assume the ancestor had the A. What had to happen is, in this lineage
leading to the ones that have a T, there had to be a mutation from A to T. And then the T variant had to spread,
right? So the mutation has to occur and the new
mutant allele has to fix, or go to 100%. Now, the probability of fixation
if it's neutral is 1/(2N). It is the alleal frequency
of the new mutation. The probability of fixation if it's
bad is much less than that, okay? Now, interestingly, if you think about it, most coding mutations
are going to be nonsynonymous. There are many more mutations that will
happen that'll be nonsynonymous than synonymous. The reason being there's a lot more ways
to be nonsynonymous, because all second position changes are nonsynonymous, most
first position changes are nonsynonymous, and some third position
changes are nonsynonymous. Let's look at this here by
looking at a codon table. So let's look at this codon table and
let's use this top corner one, UUU, just as an example. So this is phenylalanine. What base changes will change
this phenylalanine this UUU into another phenylalanine? Well in fact,
the only change you can have is a U to C. If you change this last U to an A,
it's a leucine. If you change the last U
to a G it's a leucine. If you change the first U to anything,
to a C, to an A, or a G, it becomes a leucine,
isoleucine, methionine, or valine. If you change that second base,
the second U there, to anything, it becomes a serine, or tyrosine or
stop codon or cysteine. So, really there's very few ways
to change things synonymously, but there's a lot of ways to
change things nonsynonymously. That was kind of an extreme example but that's generally true looking across
all these different amino acid codons. Still, even though that's true, synonymous sites usually
accumulate differences faster. Now when you look between species,
typically speaking, you see more synonymous changes
than nonsynonymous changes. Even though from mutation alone, there should have been more
nonsynonymous changes. What does that tell you? Well that tells you that probably a lot
of those nonsynonymous mutations are bad, and they don't actually get
the opportunity to spread. In contrast, the synonymous
changes do have this opportunity. So here's a figure from
one of your textbooks. This is showing differences between
flu viruses over a 20 year period. Here's the synonymous, here are an
accumulation of synonymous mutations, here's the accumulation of
nonsynonymous mutations. So even though you're getting more
of these nonsynonymous mutations, they are selected against right away and
never allowed to spread. So synonymous mutations
happen less often but are more likely to spread because
there's not selection acting against it. So, again, coming back to this question
of how do we look at these differences between humans and
chimps or any two species? Well one is, let's just look at genes
that have many nonsynonymous changes. Those are probably ones that matter right? Well, not so simple. Unfortunately, mutation rates are not
the same in all different genes. Some genes will get more mutations
than others because of selection. And If you get more mutations, you're
likely to accumulate more differences, whether they're synonymous or
nonsynonymous, between species. So again, just looking at nonsynonymous
changes doesn't give you a lot of information about selection or importance. It's a decent candidate by looking at
those but by itself you can't tell. The answer is, so we use these synonymous
differences to scale the number of nonsynonymous differences. Basically, synonymous differences
should accumulate neutrally and we can use them to scale for potential mutation rate differences
between different parts of the genome. So what we can do is, do some sort of ratio of nonsynonymous
differences to synonymous differences. And that is essentially estimating
the non-neutral changes relative to neutral changes. From that, we can potentially interpret,
though not completely cleanly, but we can potentially interpret
the action of natural selection. So in the subsequent videos we'll
be doing this using two tests. One we call dN/dS, the other
called the McDonald–Kreitman test. I hope you enjoyed this, Thank you.