This store, this huge flagship is a 360 degrees lifestyle from Dsquared2 as envisioned by Dean and Dan. A taste of home that blends the DNA from Canada with Italian design. The very consistent retail identity starts from the outside where the Dsquared2 logo shines over the wooden wall. Mixing contemporary design with warm materials. Then the huge store has been transformed into a sort of forest. Again mixing traditional and modern elements. Walls are composed of timber planks stacked one upon the other and treated in an autoclave to enhance the smell of sap and the natural use of wood. These walls are stationed near the entrance where they accentuate the three dimensional effect of the window. And can be rearranged according to the season, to the collections. The route through the store is given rhythm via shift and partitions that create deep display niches along the longer walls. Female and male collections are displayed in different areas. And mannequins animate the customer journey. The men's section displays the full menswear lifestyle. From day to night. With of course an emphasis on outfits for special occasions. Jeans, the iconic category are displayed in a very accessible way giving a clear idea of the variety of styles. All products are presented via regional display units such as, for instance, the tree trunks. From belts to shoes to sneakers. Another successful category for the brand. Then fitting rooms are offering neat little chambers with stone walls, fireplace and birch woods. They are also inhabited by deer. All generating a surprising effect that is amplified by the mirrored surfaces all around. Then in terms of, visual communication, multiple screens are showing beautiful images of the Canadian mountains surmounted by deer horn-like fittings. That offer a almost surreal twist to the curious forest. Then to raise your seven restaurant it was opened in 2013. This is located on the upper level of the Square Milan headquarters. The imposing building in Via Ceresio, completed in 1940, to house the state electricity company. And then renovated by the twins. This amazing restaurant is a mix between a glamour resort and a showy membership club in the perfect spirit of the brand. The place mixes modernist decor with dark colors, jeans and marble that frames a main dining room, linked in floor to ceiling windows. A couple of pools. Poolside American bar, a restaurant and a cigar room, all create an exciting atmosphere. The outdoor space, among Milan's, skyscrapers, is a spectacular, place with the elevated pools. Large enough for indulgent splashes of the glamorous Dean and Dan’s guests that can enjoy the place till late.