Fashion and Luxury brands sell many
product categories under one name. From apparel, to jewels,
to fragrances, to eyewear. The question is do they design,
manufacture and retail all of these categories by
themselves in a vertical integrated model? The answer is, no. Most of them are entering into,
licensing agreements. Today we are going to
talk about Licensing. That is a widely used, contract, and
even more strategy in these industries. Licensing is,
can be defined as a marketing and a brand extension tool widely
used by big corporation and small businesses and even startups. Entertainment, Sport, Fashion are the most visible areas
in which licensing takes place. But don't forget other areas
that are as important for licensing such as Universities,
Colleges, Cities, Metropolitan areas with brands, Museums. So licensing is used, I said, in a very wide group of industries and
product categories. Today we're going to talk about
licensing according a precise schedule. First of all we are going to introduce
the licensing concept and what licensing stands for, because the definition
is very important to understand it. Second, we are going to focus
on licensing in beauty and eyewear as this two are the most important
categories for fashion and luxury. Third, we will ask who does what in licensing after introducing
the concept of licensor and licensee. We will see what they do and how they
share activities among themselves. Then we will explore a bit the pros and
cons of licensing agreements, and the key success factors in order
to manage a licensing agreement well. Last but not least,
we are going to have a best case. We will discuss how to manage
licensing with Rainbow. That is an entertainment company but also an active licensor
in the field of fashion. So, let's start with a definition. What is Licensing? What is licensing all about? Licensing can be defined as
the process of leasing a trademark, a piece of intellectual property,
a copyrighted entity usually named as a property that
is used usually in conjunction with Products, Services or
even Promotions. The property, the piece of
intellectual property can be a design, a sketch, a logo, a graphic,
a saying, a cartoon. So there are many properties that
can be licensed to a third party. In Fashion and luxury, usually it's
very important to define the licensing. So the lease of this
property according to quite complex system of rules and obligation. First of all it's very important
to define who is licensing what. So the Licensor is
usually the brand owner, the company,
the entity that is licensing usually the brand with it's creativity and
system of signs. The Licensee is the partner that
might be a manufacturing partner. And in this case we talk about
manufacturing licensing, or can be working on both manufacturing and
retailing, and therefore is a globalizing in agreement. The licensor gives to the licensee
the permission to use the trademark and the property and
the style in a certain product category. So it might be apparel, eyewear,
fragrance, home tech styles. Within a specific territory. Might be a country, a region, or the character or
the property can be used at global level. And within a certain distribution
channel for a certain duration. Usually the longer we will see,
the longer the contract, the better is for the partnership. The brand owner receives for
the lease of the property, a royalty. That is a percentage on wholesale
sales from the licensee. And in addition to royalties, what is
called a Contribution to Communication. Again measured as a percentage on
wholesale sales made by the licensee. So, actually the advantage for the licensor is that all the business
is made by the licensee. And if the business goes well,
he receives back royalties and contribution to communication for
the business itself. So being this the definition of licensing, let's say a few words about
the origin of licensing. A licensing in fashion was born
in France around the 50s to support the extension into new
product categories of the Griffe. The French griffes such as Chanel,
San Laurent, Dior and Carden. Licensing was, as I said,
on extended categories. In particular, Fragrances. In Italy, licensing was introduced
in the 70s on the car business. Meaning that the young
designers of that time, Armani, Valentino, being without facilities and being with no money actually
we're looking for a partner. A manufacturing and distribution
partner to market their collection. And Armani and the Gruppo Finanziarlo
Tessile is an Italian company that was based in Turin,
actually established the first model of licensing agreement in fashion. Gruppo Finanzaiario Tessile producing and distributing Armani's collection
in a global marketplace. So this was really the origin in fashion. Even if licensing was not started
in fashion because we have to remember that the first licensing
was in the entertainment industry. And in particular in the cartoon
industries with Mickey Mouse and leased off the characters into
other product categories. And let's now focus on the two
most important product categories in Fashion and
Luxury that are Eyewear and Fragrances. The eyewear business became very,
very important for designers and luxury brands for mainly two reasons. The first reason being that eyewear
became from a madical device, from something functional
became something fashionable. A fashion accessory, a way to
express the customer personality and not anymore something that
you must wear to see well. And so,
this made many companies enter into the fashion scene, many fashion designers. And another reason for the booming of the eyewear category is
the fact that eyewear are very visible. You can see them on the face,
you can see the logo, and the price is usually
relatively convenient. So, they are an accessible category for those willing to enter into
the fashion and luxury business. Most of the companies
are actually the brand owners. So the licensors are not, of course,
manufacturing and retailing eyewear. The other category because
this is very complex. Distribution is very different from
the distribution of fashion and luxury. Therefore, licensing is
a major tool to help companies to market their
eyewear collection. Most of the luxury companies
that you know from Chanel to, actually, Armani and all the others, do rely on a few partners
in the licensing business. The first,
the global leader in production and distribution of eyewear is Luxottica,
an Italian company that was established in 1961 in Italy,
by Mr. Leonardo Del Vecchio. 7.3 billion Euro in 2013,
in terms of revenues and more than 70,000 employees. Luxottica is a licensee for
many companies. But Luxottica also has
a portfolio of own brands, such as Persol and Ray-Ban. The other category that is very,
very important, as I said, is fragrance. The fragrance category belongs
to the world of beauty. The beauty industry is made of fragrances,
skin care, and makeup. And accounts for
something like 20% of the total retail value at global level
of the luxury business, according to the figures
provided by Bain and Company, about this industry. So, quite a huge market value. Quite a big part of
turnover of many companies, such as Armani that makes a lot with the
beauty category, but also Chanel, Dior. In particular, fragrances and makeup
are the two categories within beauty, more influenced by fashion trends,
of course. Rather than skin care
when you need to have competences that are far
from the fashion scene. So, these are also the two businesses were
you find the most designers competing. The product life cycle is short. That all of the brand
images is very important. This is also the business of gifting,
so perfect conditions to be part of an overall lifestyle of
a fashion of a luxury brand. Here we have, again,
as in the eyewear category, a few large companies,
the companies who operate as licensee. The first company here
is the L'Oreal group, number one, followed by other licensees, such as Coty or Estee Lauder or Proctor & Gamble for
the cosmetic division. L'oreal established in Paris
in 1935 now is the first group at global level with 28
international brands in cosmetics. 23 billion sales in 2013 and over 77,000 employees. Brands that have their own
license at L'Oreal are part of the L'Oreal Looks division. And you have brands, such as Armani,
Diesel, Victor Ralph, Ralph Lauren. The other competitor is Coty, that again was established
in France in 1904. Now, it headquarters in New York. 4.6 billion sales in 2013. And again, a wide variety of
licensed brand such as Balenciaga, Bottega Veneta,
Calvin Klein and Marc Jacobs. Now, let's talk a little
bit about who does what in licensing because it's very
important to understand what is the role of the licensor,
so the brand owner and the licensee that is taking care
of the execution of this strategy. Usually, the licensing process
starts with the licensor. Of course,
the licensor is the brand owner. Therefore, in fashion and luxury is
the one providing the creativity, what we call as creative project. Creativity has to do with
the definition of the mood, for instance, of the collection,
and the inspiration, the themes and
the so-called stylistic guidelines. Then, after the briefing
from the licensor, the licensee usually is
developing prototypes and samples according to the design direction. And is also entering into
the manufacturing of the final product that will be sold
to the final customer. In fact, the licensee is also
the one distributing and retailing the different
categories on license. And also defining the pricing strategy and the different commercial condition,
condition of sales. In the retail and distribution strategy, the licensor is usually working
on the creativity development when you have materials, for
instance, for the point of sales, for the window display, for
the visual merchandising. And sometimes, the licensor is
also defining some parameters in the commercial policies,
such as the return policies, the discount percentages, how to train and
to select the sales force. Last, the communication strategy usually
is the responsibility of the licensor, both institutional and
brand communication strategy. And the media plan is, as well, managed
by the licensor, so the brand owner. Usually what the licensee,
partner does is the development of the media planning at local level and
the management of the PR. So, quite a strong interaction
among the two partners. And you easily understand that the
partnership, as we will see in a while, is a key word for the positive
outcome of a licensing agreement. Why entering into a licensing agreement? What are the pros and the cons? Let's start from the pros,
so the benefits. It's clear that the first
benefit is to share the risks and
the costs of the new venture. In particular, when you are a start-up,
because as we said, it's not that licensing is only for
big corporation, but also start-ups can actually rely on
the economies of scale, on the competence base of a partner in order to develop the
business with less risk and less costs. Then, of course, you get, as a licensor, a flow of royalties over the time
that are defined by the contracts, so from a financial standpoint
is also convenient. And you have, by the way,
a faster market penetration relying on the network of your partner,
in particular at international label. About the cons,
the disadvantages that you might have in a licensing agreement, of course,
they are all related to the diminished control that
the licensor has on activities. So, difficult to enforce controls, for
instance, in terms of manufacturing, production with an issue of
corporate social responsibility. Sometimes, you don't know who
the producers are, where they are. And this, of course,
might have an impact on the company, the licensor reputation and goodwill. A second element is the risk
of parallel channels, counterfeits, so
where the product goes in terms of retail because the licensor cannot control
the distribution in detail. Of course,
there is in any licensing contract, a very important point is the agreement
upon the distribution plan, but of course, on a global scale
this is usually quite risky. Last but not least,
in a licensing agreement of course, the licensor is far from the market and
from the consumer. It is in a situation where the company,
the licensor can understand less about the evolution of the market and
the needs of the market itself. Because of course,
this knowledge is in the licensee partner. Therefore, what are the key success
factors for a licensing agreement? So, based on the best practices
we observed in our research and working with companies,
what we understood in terms of what works well in this kind of strategy. First of all, it's very, very important to
start with a creative project that works. A creative project is, of course,
the responsibility of the licensor, so clear stylistic vision,
clear stylistic guidelines. Because even if you are not competent
as a licensor in the specific category, still you have to understand
how to work with your style, your creative vision on the new category. And also dedicate people,
managers in working on licensing. It's not something that has to
be done only by the partner. So, the concept of co-makership is very
important in the design definition. A second element is to enter
into partnerships that are long term partnerships. So, licensing contracts can be one year,
three year, up to ten, 20 years. So, there are, on the market agreements that are really
long-lasting as weddings, actually. The longer the contract, usually this
is to protect the brand equity of the brand owner because the two partners
are working, more or less, for the same objective that is, maintain the brand
value over the time across categories. A third element that is very important
to take into consideration is the professional management
of the contract. Meaning that you need to control
the distribution outlet, the distribution strategy. Everything should be approved,
products, new lines, new launches, local marketing
strategies in order, again, not to infringe the intellectual property,
not to dilute the brand equity, and distribution in particular is
a key issue because if you think that the luxury brand might have
a limited number of doors for its own core product, but
then entering into eyewear or fragrances the number
of doors are thousands. And this is the reason also why you
enter in this business with a partner. Being thousands, of course,
the control is important and cannot be performed by
the licensor very often. So, in one word, the keyword for a successful licensing
agreement is partnership. So, conceive and
think about this agreement and not as something where you have two
companies or two entities working on different strategies and
objective but really something where you have a mutual goal at the end that
is to maintain over the long run. The brand equity.