All companies follow in fashion trends. But at the same time, they need to
maintain a certain individual character, and maintain their positioning,
preserving their individual style. Here comes the concept
of stylistic identity. The individual style that each company has
on the market and makes it recognizable. The concept of stylistic identity is
related to the collection of stylistic and aesthetic codes that
belong to a certain brand. Think about, for
a company such as Bottega Veneta, the Knot, or the Interciatto leather
that is part of the iconic products. Or, think about the check for Burberry. Think about the zigzag in neat wear with
many colors of a company such as Missoni. So, each company should
have the original and unique stylistic identity in order to interpret the styles and
trends on the market. Otherwise, they would all look the same,
more or less. And the interesting thing is
that not only designer companies do have a stylistic identity, but
increasingly, also in the medium and premium market, more and more brands
do have their own style on the market. A retailer such as Gap has a certain
American classic with a twist. The Denim. The Color Blue. Or, a fast fashion
retailer such as Zara has a specific point of view
on the market proposing a concept of collection
that usually is very cool, very refined, for
a certain kind of customer. A very important element
of the stylistic identity is the origin in terms of country of
origin and heritage of the brand. The idea is that the country
of origin of brands and designers are influencing
the way they see style. The Baroque, the Sicilian Baroque for
Dolce Gabbana, the Milan's fogs for
the greyish color of Giorgio Armani, the colorful bold style of Calabria for
Gianni Versace. So, the country of origin
is a very powerful and strong inspiration for
many designers in the world. The lifestyle behind countries,
even if it is a stereotype, is still something very aspirational that
many customers are willing to buy in. Think about Ralph Lauren and his idealized vision of the East Coast
style of the US or the fantastic world of
Native Americans and Indians with their colors that
are art of Ralph Lauren DNA. Another element that belongs to the
heritage and therefore, to the stylistic identity is the country of origin in
terms of competences and know how. When companies such as Tod's and
Bottega Veneta are talking about craftsmanship and
hints behind their style, they also claim that, for
instance, made in Italy. The value of made in Italy. The country of origin in
that case works very much as a guarantee of authenticity for
these brands. Within the style and
stylistic identity of each brands, there are usually some iconic products. As we said,
iconic products are more relevant for luxury brands rather than for
fashion brands. But increasingly,
icons are a part of product strategies of these companies because,
let's say, quite easy to sell, and
they make brands very recognizable. Icon products do embody the heritage and
the DNA of the brand, are re-proposed season after
season in the collection, maybe reinterpreted according
to the seasonal trend, and often icons are also made in
collaboration with bloggers, celebrities, or even retailers. All brands in many product categories and
price ranges do have icons. From the Kelly bag of Hermes to
the business jacket for Armani, the Chanel purse, the Burberry trench,
or the D bag for Tod's.