Thanks to our students we understood that engagement is key. The former CEO of Burberry said that you need mind share if you want market share, and in order to have mind share, you need to engage. Fashion companies have to play with the magic. They have to make people dream, but they cannot leave themselves anymore to a nice advertising company. They have to develop original and relevant content. They have to speak about the product, but as well about the music, the art, the lifestyle that goes with product itself. They need to understand that the virtual world is not virtual anymore. On the contrary it’s also part of our physical experience. The more they use in-store technology in the physical points of sale, the more they're able to create a direct connection with a brand ambassador on social media, and the more they will convert all of this passion that so many people have for fashion brands into real sales. Last but not least, fashion companies need to understand that one size doesn't fit all. We have different social media, different tools, we have different geographies as the ones represented in the focus group, and therefore companies need to be able to convey a strong and consistent message, but at same time localize the strategy as far as PR and digital approach is concerned. Keeping all the above in mind, companies should aim at creating a transmedia storytelling. By a transmedia storytelling I mean a story that unfolds across multiple platforms. Each medium contributing to unfold a piece of the story and that sees the listener of the story, the consumer, as an active participant. It's not just about describing who you are, but letting the customer being part of this story, playing an active role. In the fashion and luxury industry we have some amazing examples of companies that were able to create such a kind of engagement. I think that the point of reference for everyone is Burberry. Burberry is a company that was able to transform itself into a true social media enterprise. There is a very inspiring video in which the CEO speaks about this evolution and how the brand has been able to touch the customer at every single point with the same message: from the physical fashion show to the tweet walk, from the store to on-line e-commerce. It somehow creates the same seamless experience; from the official website to new platforms such as in which the story of the Burberry’s iconic product is told with pictures of people wearing the trench coat and giving their own interpretation, to Burberry acoustic, in which the companies develop other areas then fashion by sponsoring emerging talent in British music. Let's now take a couple of minutes and watch a video that perfectly describes what it means to be a social media enterprise. Angela Ahrendts, former CEO of Burberry is speaking. Could you listen? You have to be totally connected. If you don't do that, I won’t know what your business model is in five years. Fashion is about innovation and digital is a journey that companies need to take.