Fashion companies do not only sell products. They sell a way of expressing ourselves through products. We do not only buy physical articles. We buy emotional associations with the worlds the fashion companies are able to create. The WASP lifestyle for Ralph Lauren. The Sicilianity for Dolce Gabbana. The Art of Journey for Louis Vuitton. We buy into dreams of desirability. We do see the best actresses on the red carpet, with the most beautiful dresses. And the next day, we buy the lipstick in order to share this magic. So creating the dream factor is fundamental for creating those emotional associations. But how can this dream be created? A very important role is played by the designers. The designers are not only the people physically doing the sketches or taking care of the product development. In fashion, the designers are, as well, a very powerful communication tool. One big advantage of fashion, as compared to other industries, is the possibility of the designer to come out at the end of the fashion show. They're under the flash of the photographers. They are transformed into celebrities. The name of the game is identity. And creating the myth of a person is always faster and more effective than creating the myth of a brand. Designers are not just talented inventors. They become a very powerful communication tool. They are the ones endorsing the brand’s values. Think about Tom Ford. He's the American designer that successfully repositioned Gucci at the end of the 90s. And he was able to create a very strong association between the brand and his own personality. He made Gucci sexy, glamorous, metropolitan. And he became as famous as himself, that when he left Gucci, he was immediately given a cover on the US Vanity Fair with the two hottest actresses at that time. In the meantime, he was also asked to pay, to play as a testimonial for brands such as Absolut vodka and American Card, and American Express Card. This does not happen in any other industry. If I tell you the name Jonathan Ive, I'm sure that most of you don't have a clue as to who he is. And even those who are able to identify the name, they're not likely to stop Jonathan Ive in the street and ask for a selfie together. By the way, Jonathan Ive is the vice president of design of Apple. He's the person behind the very successful design of products such as the iPod, iPhone, and iPad. He's a guru, and he's very well recognized in the industry, but is not a celebrity outside of it. Because he didn't have the exposure that the catwalk has been giving to the designers. The designers are key, but in order for the brand to really convey values, this concept must be shared and supported by the whole media system. You need to have the right mood in the collection, but then this mood has to be translated in the right advertisement. Through working with the best photographers, the best top models. By distributing this content in the best magazines in the world. Communication plays a fundamental role in creating the dream factor. In another MOOC, we will explore this very fascinating world more in detail.