We are here with a Rainbow that
is guest to this lecture, and we're going to talk about licensing. Rainbow is a great Italian company in character with a famous
asset that is Winx. And we are here with Lorraina and Alessandra that are in charge of
marketing and product development, and we are going to ask them something
about how they manage licensing. so, Alessandra, how does licensing
project work with characters? What is important in your daily job? >> Rainbow as a licensor provided to our
international licenses, is the character and the style guide we give them
a comprehensive style guide made by fashion style guide, in order for
them to develop a product collection. For us, it's really important to promote
our identity and the Winx Club DNA through our creative asset in order to control
the product development worldwide. >> And at your work goes through,
many product categories, right? And fashion has a main importance for
character. >> Absolutely. >> Why?
>> Absolutely. Fashion for us is really, really
important, because the Winx Club for instance our main property
value is fashion. So, for these, in order to come out
with a beautiful and really exciting and appealing product, we provide it to our
licensing, different assets made by icons, background, images, that can be
perfect for the product application. >> And Lorena, what is the job
of the marketing manager, then? Well, how would you support
the licensing project in fashion, or in any other product categories? >> Rainbow as a licensor will, needs to
work on a global marketing strategy in order to first of all the brand awareness,
and since Winx Club has a lot values. We work really on a marketing
strategy to strength and let all target understand which are the
values, and the strength on the brand. And at the same time, we work side by side
with all our licensees in order to support them with the launch of their collection,
working really close to them to to launch in the proper
way the collection that needs to respect the values
on the brand itself. So, this could be global
events that could be retail action both for
trade and consumers. So, according their needs,
we really work together to find the most suitable strategy that could help of the,
of the products. >> So, at the end of the day,
license the key sets of factors for licensing are in the concept
of partnership, right? >> Exactly, exactly. This is, this is really our key work,
so, our our clients which are the licensees are first of all
partners, so that's why we decide. The beginning with the brand department,
how the collection needs to be developed. And at the same time with
the marketing department, we decide together how this
collection needs to be launched. >> Thank you very much for
being here with us. And good luck with the Winx. >> Thank you. >> Thank you.