Bottega Veneta is the essence and a benchmark in terms of luxury branding. The company was established in Italy in 1966 in Vicenza, an area well known for craftsmanship of leather goods. Right from the start Bottega Veneta was associated to discrete luxury and brought to the market, a woven kind of workmanship that was defined as “intrecciato”. And the motto of the company was, right from the start: “where your initials are enough,” just to point out a sort of discrete understated luxury against the strong logo-driven branding that was very popular in those years. In 2001 Bottega Veneta was acquired by a PPR, now Kering Group, and the German designer Thomas Maier, was appointed creative director. And under Thomas Maier’s supervision actually the brand grew in terms of product categories always with the same style, and stylistic identity from leather goods to fragrances, ready-to-wear, and even interior design and furniture. Now, the company is around one billion Euro, in terms of turnover. In terms of business model the company very rooted in to the territory and to the “Made in” with a direct control on the network of suppliers that in luxury is so important. If we want to know more about the story and the turn around of Bottega Veneta, we can go to see the video about Bottega Veneta turn around. In terms of Bottega Veneta’s reputation for understated luxury, let's see how this reputation was built in terms of stylistic codes. Luxury for the company is signified by the material that is used, its design, but even more the know-how of its artisans. Thomas Maier, the designer, has a minimalist obsession with the fine details of precisely engineered items and finished simplicity. The designer also said he is quite obsessed with functionality, also in  ready-to-wear there is a lot of technical know-how and an in depth exploration of cuts and pattern making. So how can we define Bottega Veneta’s style in a nutshell? Simple but subtle, for connoisseur, very functional as true luxury should be. The accessory line has been, right from the start, at the center of the product strategy; and Bottega follows an icon-driven strategy, where the cabat, and the intrecciato are still very relevant in the product offer, but they are also seasonally reinterpreted, bringing to the overall collection a lot of glamor and contemporary taste.