What is the strategy for the textile
companies, to make the value they produce to be perceived, and
to get a premium price on the market? Somehow the recipe lies in making
the invisible become visible. It is not sufficient to
own the inside of the bag. You need to be outside of the bag. A book that is a reference for
understanding how this strategy could be feasible is the one that Philip Kotler and
Waldemar Pfoertsch wrote, and the title is, indeed, Ingredient Branding,
Making the Invisible Visible. In this very famous book the two
authors define the ingredient brand as the technical term of this
strategy of taking the product, originally a business to business product, to the consumer marketplace,
where it gains global recognition. So, as I was mentioning it is
key that the final customer, it is aware of the component that
is inside the final product. Let me give you some example. Lycra, that in the American
word is known as spandex. And by the way,
spandex is the anagram of the word expand. This is to say how important is
the naming as well for a company. Probably, most of you don't
exactly know what lycra is. It's a synthetic fiber. But, I'm sure that when you buy
some underwear, some beach wear, there is a lycra labeling. You are reassured about the fact
that you will have more comfort, more stretch, more fit. Same is for goretex, that is assuring more
transpirability to your active garment. And then we also have examples from
different industries like Swarovski. Swarovski succeed in moving from business
to business, to business to consumer, and now they also have a very
successful jewelry line, thanks to the co-branding thanks to the co-branding they did for years and
still do with fashion and luxury brands. So, when we buy a coteur dress, or
we buy a bag, they're made with Swarovski elements, assure us the quality
the brightness of the crystals inside. Some companies as mention
they stay in the business to business part of the more as
in the business to consumer, thanks to years of investment in
the branding of their companies. In Italy we have cases that I've
mentioned such as Zegna and Loro Piana, but we also have other
cases such as Vibram that was very well famous as a component for
soles, that created very funny shoes. The one that with the fingers foot. So, it's up to the company to decide
if the ingredient branding is to stay just with another brand, or
is to go directly to the end customer. But eventually for everyone to promote the ingredient is a way to create
more value for the final customers. That's why it's a strategy that
we can define as a win-win one. Because both for the producer of the final
garment, and for the producer of the ingredient, promoting the quality,
the aesthetic, or what is inside, is helping the customer to understand the
reason why he should pay a premium price. And those create more loyalty, because there is nothing that
creates addiction as the quality.