In this clip we will talk about how to build a retail identity, so how to transfer the brand codes in terms of style and in terms of communication into a retail space. Let me say first of all what is the outcome of a retail identity strategy for a luxury or fashion brand. The outcome is to give the customer, in any place or in any touch point, the same image and the same kind of experience of the brand that he or she may have in the flagship or in the company headquarters talking with management. What are the drivers? What are the tools that you can use in order to work on the retail identity management? First of all, let me say that the location is important, it's fundamental. If you are an exclusive luxury brand, it's not enough to say I'm at High Street; there are different areas, different corners, different miles or meters on High streets where an exclusive versus affordable luxury or fast fashion brands should be. Location makes the positioning. And so
This is the first element to be considered. Then there are the windows. First contact with the customer is really at the windows. Think of a company such as Zara for instance, they use windows as the sole communication tool. Window should represent the season or may be used as “storytellers.” When you enter you immediately deliver an idea of what your brand stands for through the visual merchandising and of course the layout of the store. There are many layouts: free-flow, circular, spin. The selection of the layout together with the technique of visual-merchandising: museum-like, free service, with focal points, will deliver a certain image rather than another one. It’s also very important the way you manage your staff; the way they are dressed, their uniforms; the kind of service, the way they interact with the customer, the way they greet the customer the way they say thanks and they engage with the customer in the point-of-sale. You might have procedures for that. At the end of the day everything that happens in retail, starting from furniture, to the colors, to the animation through technology that now it's a huge trend, to the human touch that the customer feels makes your brand stand for something that is different from competitors. And in an omni-channel perspective this identity
management has to be done also online. So how, what is the best way in order to customize the digital experience of your customer? What are the stories you're willing to tell? What is the kind of path within your platform that the customer has to follow? And, increasingly, again in a perspective, you need to deliver an experience also in a wholesale space, trying to customize as much as possible as in the retail, the final experience of your customer.