Hi, I'm here today with
Francesco Barberis Canonico. The creative director of,
Vitale Barberis Canonico. And as well,
a family member of the 13 generation. Yes, you understood well 13. The company,
is probably the oldest made in the world. It was founded in 1663 and in 2003,
celebrated the 350 years anniversary. Vitale Barberis Canonico, is a symbol of Italian excellence,
in made in Italy fabrics. Since the year of foundation, all
the production phases have been carried, out in Trivero, where we are now. A village located in the Biella district,
the heart for the production of high end, quality fabrics in Italy. And the company, also during the crisis,
has always reported double digit growth,
thanks to a combination of the 100% made in Italy quality, and a style that could
be defined as classic, with a twist. So, Francesco, you like to refer
to Vitale Barberis Canonico, as the designer behind the designer. Can you elaborate on this concept, and explain what is the value
of a fabric in a suit? >> Yes Erica, the concept of
the designer behind the designer, is simply the fact that we have
to think and design the fabrics, well before the real designers have
to make their own collections. So normally we try and
style fabric two years in advance. We have to try anticipate what are going
to be the trends in the designs. And we think that the fabric
is a very crucial and important ingredient for the suit. Because when a customer enters the stores, the first thing that strikes them is the
color of a jacket or suit, and the design. The second thing is they go and
touch the fabric. And the third thing,
is do we normally try it on, and decide if we want to buy it or not. So we believe that the fabric is
a very important ingredient in the, in the making of the suit. >> And indeed, in recent years made-to-measure is developing more and more. Why so in your view? >> I think that people
people are more careful now, because of this world's recession. The customers are very, very focussed. People are more careful with their money. So they want something very
special that is made for them, that is absolutely personalized. So made to measure is
it's a good excuse for the stores to offer a special
service to their customers. Also they can do a special
promotion to fabrics. And it makes the customer come out
with a suit that is made special for him, and makes the customer
finally feel more special. >> Yeah because when you wear something
that is done for you it is better for the comfort for everything to fit right. >> Yes, and also it's better for the stores, because they don't have
to buy all the sizes, all the fits. You know, they, they they have
hardly no risk, and you can have so many personalization, you can use,
you can choose your own lining, you can choose a particular button or
a different style, and I think it really is a way forward for
the future in the suit. Both the customer and the store are happy. >> Yes. Yes. Because also the stores
they can charge more for it. Yeah, so, that's another thing. There is also an important economic reason why. Francesco, Vitale Barberis Canonico is
a business to business company, so, somehow, your value is hidden,
is not visible to the end customer. How do you educate the customers, especially the youngsters to recognize and appreciate the value of a fabric? Yes, basically we are trying to educate the youngsters because we feel it's very important. We see now that in the world, there's a huge comeback to classic values, to old values, so people are getting tired of wearing ripped jeans and t-shirts. And we see a lot of young people who are very interested in dressing up, in being more smart. Investing themselves in the suit, so
we see a major change in America and in Europe and, we try and
educate the young people because, youngsters don't know what to wear,
when to wear, and, the different occasions, the different
type of fabrics and, we found that, they're actually very interested
in finding out and knowing why. A fabric is better to be
worn in a certain season, or what should be worn in a certain occasion. So that's, we can play an important role,
I think, in the future. >> And how do you practically do this? Through your website there, or
social media, can you give some examples? >> Yes.
We, we have a Facebook where we, we post many things almost every day. We have a, we, we try and
do an interesting site. So we, we like to educate people in the
sense that when they buy the first suit, if they type in our name, they can see what would be the formal,
the occasion of wear. How to look after a good suit for
many years. Also, what should be your ideal wardrobe, this is very important,
because most people now don't know. People for example that finish their
university that enter their job career, they need to have a basic wardrobe to be presentable for work or for social events,
so I think we can play an important role. >> And, Francesco, can you give me
some tips about the ideal wardrobe, what are the must-haves that a young
customer, a young guy should have? Well I think three, two or
three suits should be the minimum. Of course I'm biased so,
I think a dark grey pick and pick, which is a perfect everyday suit. And you can wear it all year round. I think the blazer is the most important. A, a good blazer,
you can wear with anything. You can wear in a board
meeting in the morning. You can wear it for
a drink in the evening. It's perfect for traveling. So if you go away for a couple days, it's you can pack it in your
travelette and and it works very well. And and also maybe a flannel suit for
winter. You know we try to explain to people that people should wear different
clothes in different summer. And it's also very functional
because once you get use to wearing a suit it's about respect of other
people but also about respect of yourself. And so it's a very important,
we try to, to send this message across. Always speaking about your
relationship with young customers. I know that you're very
connected with rock music. Why so? It seems strange. >> Well, because we, we think that
one way to attract a youngster, we did a collaboration with
Ernesto Magazine in Italy. We did a guide. We showed youngster all the,
all the rock star's ideal. And I issues. And dressed up with a suit. So it, immediately they can associate
that dressing up is actually cool, rather than being old fashioned or,
or just boring. >> Yes, I remember a nice picture
of Mick Jagger, David Bowie. >> Yes, I think it was a nice way
to associate ourself with music, because everyone loves music. It's a very democratic and
and friendly thing to do. And I think young people got
very interested about this. >> So is it correct to say that
the suit should be part of a lifestyle? >> Yes absolutely. A suit should be part of a lifestyle
like a good watch a nice car. Good food.
You know, in Italy we're fortunate because
we're surrounded by beauty. So we get inspiration from anywhere. And, we're very likely to be here and,
to be part of this. >> Now let's speak a little
bit more about the company, so have this 100% made in Italy. How committed you are to this,
>> Very. We are very committed,
we invest a real lot of money, we. Employ young people and young talents,
this is very important. And even the company may sound older, and has a slightly what people
would think an old product. We have tried to renovate it to do much more let's say casual and still elegant, but not somformal, and not so stiff. products. Exactly because we, we think that the world is changing,
and we have to keep up with trends and what is currently in the window stores. And, and think, of the future,
too, which is very important. >> And what is the relationship
between the company and the district? I know that you have workers that have been in
the company since generation—-? >> It's very special. I mean, the company was funded under its. It's named by my grandfather,
who was Vitale Berberis Canonico, and this company is very unique,
I think, not only in textile, but in any sector in the world, in the fact
that I work with some workers, their father worked with my father, and their
grandfather worked with my grandfather. So there's a very strong family sense, and this is very important because,
They love what we do and we all feel very, very close, we'll speak one another and
and the workers they really put a lot of pride in what, whatever task,
whatever thing they do, it's a and they make a world class product
which we sell globally all over the world. There’s passion, commitment,
sustainability but your also very open minded because you export in many
different countries.>>Yes, we have to be very open minded and we have to think
that the suit is a very global product. Even in the most remote country in
Africa there will be a minister or. A governor or
a surgeon who needs to wear a suit. Who travels to London, who goes to Paris. So it's a, really a product we can sell
anywhere from Katmandu to New York. And that makes it easy in a way but we have to. We have to have a product
that is has appeal global. Globally.
So it's very important. >> So the heart is in Italy, but
you really speak to the world. >> We try.
>> In the end, what is the recipe to make Vitale Barberis
Canonico a success for the next 350 years? Well this is a very difficult question. One question. I mean we have to,
first of all we have to be competitive. So we still have to invest
in this facility. We have to buy new machinery. We also have to attract talents because
we have to invest in people. And we just have to, I think, stick to what we're doing and hopefully touch with things and
continue to be okay. You know, as a company we're
doing very well, and we must, we must we have a very strong tradition,
which is very important. Because we're very known for the classic,
designs, and the elegant and formal. But also we should be looking at
the trends and different blends. You know,
before we used to be 100% pure wool. We now, it's summer,
it's impossible to sell 100% pure wool, so we do blends like linen,
silk wool, silk and cotton. So, we'll always try to look ahead and
be ahead of the game. So, know your roots, but
look ahead to the future. Thank you Francesco,
it was very inspiring and a privilege. >> Thank you very much,
it has been a pleasure. >> Bye.