John Gill, Esq: As discussed in
other segments of this course, ordinary people can sometimes
find themselves in extraordinary circumstances and do things they
might never think themselves capable of doing. These are generally honest
people who commit fraud because they have a financial need. There is another category of
fraud perpetrator that is more cunning. These are people who steal, not
because they need the money, but because they think they
can get away with it. These people are predators. They don't commit fraud because
the opportunity suddenly drops in their lap. They are on the hunt looking for
any weakens in an organization that could lead to
a dishonest payday. This segment will discuss how to
design your anti fraud efforts around this type of fraudster. The classic model for
understanding why people commit fraud is what is now referred
to as the faud triangle. It is based on research by Dr.
Donald Cressey in the 1950s. Cressey attempted to explain
why seemingly honest, trusted individuals would steal
from their employers. In the cases Cressey studied, he
found that for a large number of people, they commit fraud
because they have a financial need. They are under
financial pressure. Second, they see a way to
relieve the pressure through fraud. This is perceived opportunity. If I steal these funds, I can
keep my home, for example. And finally, because these
individuals are normally law abiding citizens they feel
the need to rationalize their conduct. They have the need to justify
their behavior so they don't feel bad about themselves. For example, some may say that
they will pay the money back or that they deserve it. But the fraud triangle
doesn't attempt to explain all categories of
fraud perpetrators. There are some individuals who
are actively looking to commit fraud. These are predators. Unlike the accidental fraudster
who needs money and sees the opportunity to relieve it, the
predator slinking through the organization looking for
weaknesses and vulnerabilities. He has no need to
rationalize his actions. He simply wants the money
any way he can get it. Research has shown that
sometimes accidental fraudsters can turn into predators. Occasionally the fraudster
who first steals to relieve financial pressure can then
become addicted to the lifestyle and extra money. At that point, the accidental
fraudster can turn into a predator. ACFE's report to the nation's
survey has shown repeatedly that very few frauds occur within the
first year of the perpetrators employment. This means that predatory
fraudsters can be patient. Large frauds can't be
accomplished right after a person is hired. It may take time to move to a
point within the company where the fraudster has sufficient
trust and organizational opportunity to steal. Anyone can potentially be a
fraudster, even your most long serving and trusted employees. In designing anti fraud
controls, the traditional fraud triangle must be modified. Since predators don't commit
fraud because of need, this element is no longer important. Likewise, since these
individuals aren't trying to justify their actions to
themselves, there's no need to come up with elaborate excuses
or rationalizations for their conduct. The only element
left is opportunity. Predators spend their time and
energy looking for opportunities
76
00:03:46,333
to commit fraud.