All industries are struggling with the
concept of big data. With servers across the country
capturing tens of thousands of terabytes of data each day regarding all facets of business, the
challenge is not finding usable data; the challenge today is how to
effectively review and manage the data you have. This section of the course will examine
some of the methods Fraud Examiners use to analyze data to help find fraudulent
activity. It's important for the fraud examiner and
forensic accountant to understand how data is collected and
what are some of the specific tools and techniques that help you locate that fraud needle in the business haystack. Fraud
prevention is an important part of every organization. If you do nothing to
prevent fraud, it will flourish and ultimately consume
your business. But at the same time you cannot completely eliminate fraud.  It
is amazing how often a fraud perpetrator can find the one hole in an otherwise
solid set of internal controls. For example, failures may occur within
internal control such as even duties are separated, people work
together to circumvent controls. Sharing or stealing usernames or
passwords belonging to other employees, they could then be used to commit fraud,
or you may have a situation where adequate controls are just not in place
to stop a particular risk. One of the keys are fraud prevention is a
concept called perception of detection.  Not only can data analysis detect fraud, the fact that an
organization regularly analyzes data for fraud can be an
effective control mechanism all by itself. If employees and vendors
know that an organization is conducting
vigorous tests to detect fraud that may cause them to
think twice about committing it. One of the primary considerations is
whether or not data are available to find a particular
type for fraud.  But in order to know what data to look at,
you must also understand how particular frauds occur. When designing data analysis tests,  you
must think about the various operations of the business and how they are vulnerable to fraud.  For
example, let's say you have a purchasing manager
who's taking payments or kickbacks from a vendor for every order placed. If these payments are made in cash to
the manager outside working hours, then how could you find this activity through data analysis? Is there any way to detect it?
Surprisingly to most people, there are several ways to possibly
detect such a fraud. A careful review of purchasing transactions can reveal if one vendor has seen a
dramatic increase in purchases. Additionally, tests can be run to
determine whether there's been a dramatic increase in
inventory or supply. Unusual activity should be reviewed
to determine if there is a legitimate explanation for anomalies or whether
fraud could be at play. But being able to find such activity also involves two other important items: one is understanding what the data
should look like (this requires not only
knowledge of the business operations but an understanding up the historical
data available); additionally, effective data analysis means understanding the software and
other tools available to conduct the analysis. As we mentioned, one of the problems
today is the overabundance of data.  Almost everything is captured somewhere. It's important for the fraud examiner to
work closely with the information technology or IT department to identify
the potential sources of data. Much data are gathered inside the
organization. If you are working with their foreign
organization, you and the IT representative can identify
what types of data might be of most assistance in proactive fraud detection analysis.  The IT representative will
understand what data is collected but it will take the fraud examiner's skill
to understand what types of schemes the organization is at risk for.  There
are also a lot of data available external to the organization. For example,
if a company is publicly traded, a wealth of financial filings are available from
the SEC or other government regulators. Other
types of non-financial information are available through the Internet, newspaper, magazine articles, and trade
journal reports. These sources should also be reviewed for information that is relevant to the particular case under investigation.
There have been many instances of investigators finding references in
newspaper articles regarding company employees having been charged
with theft in previous jobs or locations. You won't find such information on the
individual's resume, but you may find it through careful
records searching. Financial data analysis is an extremely
sophisticated endeavor. Not only is it necessary to understand
what data is available and how to capture it, but you also have to know what you're
looking for. Historical comparisons are extremely
important. If there's an unexplained and dramatic
increase in one item from one period to the next, that could
be a sign a fraud, or could simply be normal operations. In order to find out, you need to
understand how the business operates and what you would expect the numbers to show.  For example, if sales remain steady but inventory
goes down dramatically, what is the cause?  It could be that older obsolete inventory has been written off the books, or it could mean that inventory is being
stolen. You'll need to review the records and
conduct more inquiries to know for sure, but understanding the
business and its operations is critical to understanding the data you've
analyzed.