[Music] Dr. Richard Riley, PhD: As
described previously, the actions of some fraud and
financial crime perpetrators are more closely aligned with
the behavior of a predator. In this real world example, a 10
year old boy is strangled by his father for life insurance money
and is left on the side of the road near a lake. To cover up the murder, the
father starts a fire in his home and blames his son for
accidentally starting that fire. The murder and the fire allowed
the father to collect insurance proceeds The scheme was perpetrated to
repay the father's most recent employer for restitution for
a fraud that he had committed. What the employer did not know
is that this incident was the third time the father
had perpetrated a fraud. In the prior instances, previous
employers had quietly terminated the man after discovering
the defalcation. The choices made by each of his
former employers allowed the perpetrator to quietly move on
to his next victim and in this scenario, eventually create the
ultimate victim, his own son. The father was a predator. The predator seeks out
organizations where he or she can start the scheme almost
immediately upon being hired. At some point, the accidental
fraudster, if not caught early, moves from the behavior
characterized by the accidental fraudster. Research by Dorminey et
al asserts that most fraud literature fails to recognize
predators focused on deliberate and malicious
criminal activities. Yet concerns for auditors and
practitioners are warranted. Predators are likely better
organized, perhaps more capable, have more complex concealment
schemes, and are better prepared to deal with auditors and
other oversight mechanisms. Finally, because the central
focus of the predator's opportunity, risk assessments
centered on pressure and rationalization, hallmarks of
the fraud triangle, SAS 99. and auditing standards is
unlikely to identify predator schemes. Now that we've expanded beyond
the fraud triangle, we will explore other
fraudster attributes. The fraud scale was developed
through an analysis of 212 frauds in the early 1980s. Based on the results of their
study, Steve Albrecht and his colleagues proposed relying
on two components of the fraud triangle, pressure and
opportunity, but replacing rationalization with personal
integrity, an attribute that may be observable for
past behaviors. For example, if you see persons
whose ethical decisions and actions are not what you believe
they should be, maybe that person would also consider
perpetrating a fraud. Operationalizing the fraud
scale, the degree of fraud risk is determined by jointly
considering three criteria; pressure, opportunity,
and integrity. For example, in this
illustration everything is in balance and the fraud risk is
neutral but when situational pressures and perceived
opportunities are high and personal integrity is low, then
fraud is more likely to occur than when the opposite is true. With regard to the fraud
triangle, personal integrity affects the probability that
an individual may rationalize inappropriate behavior. For example, persons with
greater integrity would be less likely to form rationalizations
for justifying inappropriate behavior. From that perspective,
integrity is a refinement of the rationalization construct as
presented in the fraud triangle. Around 2004, Wolfe and Hermansen
argued that the fraud triangle could be enhanced to improve
both fraud prevention and detection by considering a
fourth element, capability. In addition to addressing
incentive and opportunity, and then the rationalization,
the author's four sided fraud diamond gives consideration to
an individual's capability which is described as an individual's
personal traits and abilities that play a major role in
whether a fraud may actually occur. The authors examine evidence
that suggests that many frauds, especially some of the multi
billion dollar ones, would not have occurred without
perpetrators having the right capabilities. As described by Wolfe and
Hermansen, opportunity opens the door to fraud. Incentives and rationalizations
draw the fraudster closer to the door, but the fraudster must
have the capability to recognize the opportunity to walk
through that door to commit the fraudulent act and cancel it. The essential traits thought
necessary for committing fraud especially for large sums over
long prose of time include a combination of intelligence,
position, ego, and the ability to deal well with stress. The person's position or
function within the organization may furnish the ability to
create or exploit an opportunity for fraud. The largest frauds are committed
by intelligent, experienced, and creative people with a solid
grasp of company controls and vulnerabilities. This knowledge is leveraged
to use the person's over or authorized access to
systems or assets. This type of person has a strong
ego and great confidence that he or she will not be detected
or the belief that they could easily talk themselves
out of trouble if caught. In the context of the fraud
triangle, capability modifies opportunity by limiting
opportunity to a small set of individuals thought to have
the necessary capability. Thus capability likely affects
the probability that an individual will be able to
exploit opportunities in the controled environment
of the organization. In addition to an examinations
of the theories centered on the white collar criminal, the
actor, we extend our discussion to include the characteristics
of the white collar crime, the action. A corollary to the fraud
triangle is the lesser known triangle of fraud action
sometimes referred to as the elements of fraud. While the fraud triangle
identifies conditions under which fraud may occur. The Triangle of Fraud Action
describes the actions that the individual must perform
to perpetrate the fraud. The three components of the
Triangle of Fraud Action are the act, concealment,
and conversion. The act represents the execution
and methodology of the fraud, such as embezzlement, check
kiting, or material fraudulent financial reporting. Concealment represents
hiding the fraud act. Examples of concealment include
creating false journal entries, falsifying bank reconciliations,
or destroying files. Conversion is the process of
turning ill gotten gains into something usable by the
perpetrator in a way that appears to be legitimate. Examples include money
laundering, cars, or homes. Evidence of the act concealment
and conversion can be collected and presented
during adjudication. Further, when considered in
total, the triangle of fraud action makes it difficult for
the perpetrator to argue that the act was accidental or to
deny his or her role in the act. Evidence of concealment in
particular provides a compelling argument that the
act was intentional. We put all of this together in
what is known as the Dorminey et al Meta Model. First the model identifies the
pre fraud state of nature as perceived by the perpetrator,
the left hand side depicting the fraud triangle. The model characterizes the
perpetrator as the initial decision maker, the one who must
examine his or her personal and professional situation as well
as deterrence prevention and detection fabric in place to
determine if a fraudulent act can be successful in both
execution and concealment. Moving to the far right, the
model examines the post fraud state and focuses on the
specific elements of the fraud or the financial crime. The criminal act, the efforts
to conceal the act, and an identification of what and
how benefits accrue to the perpetrator. Between the perpetrator and
the criminal act are the organizational and societal
interventions such as internal controls, broader elements of
corporate governance, legal and regulatory environment, and
other prevention techniques aimed at producing the incidence
and impact of the fraudulent acts. These interventions have been
characterized by deterrence, prevention, and the
perception of detection. Each of these is at least
partially outside the control of the perpetrator yet they
influence the perpetrator's assessment of the probability of
success in terms of completing
164
00:09:30,033
and concealing the criminal act.