[Music] A person under pressure will do
things that he or she might not do under normal circumstances. If a person is threatened with
losing his home or his family, he may turn to fraud as a
means to relieve that financial pressure. Often these individuals have
been with the organization for many years and occupy
positions of extreme trust. These individuals can be
called accidental fraudsters. They are seemingly law abiding,
honest people, but when faced with extreme financial
pressure, they turn to fraud. This segment will begin by
defining some of the basic elements of fraud. We will also discuss the cost
of fraud and the importance of understanding how it occurs. We will examine some of the
leading theories on why people commit fraud and how that
information can be used to help us prevent it. Thank you for joining us. In general terms, fraud is an
intentional deception, whether by omission or commission,
because of the victim to suffer economic loss and the
perpetrator to realize a gain. Under common law, fraud includes
four essential elements, A material false statement Knowledge that the statement
was false when it was spoken Reliance on the false
statement by the victim Damages resulting from the
victim's reliance on the false statement. In the broadest sense, fraud
can encompass any fraud for gain that uses deception as
its principle technique. This deception is implemented
through fraud schemes, specific methodologies used to commit
and conceal the fraudulent act. The legal definition of fraud is
the same, whether the incidence is criminal or civil. The difference is that criminal
cases must meet a higher burden of proof. For example, an employee steals
$100,000 from his employer by setting up a phony company and
submitting false invoices for services that are not performed. That conduct is criminal because
he's stealing funds through deception, but the company has
also been injured the employee's actions and can sue in civil
court to get its money back. One of the largest causes
of fraud involves asset misappropriations. Asset misappropriation is
simply the theft or misuse of an organization's assets. Common examples include skimming
revenues, stealing inventory, obtaining fraudulent
payments, and payroll fraud. Corruption entails the wrongful
or unlawful misuse of influence in a business transaction to
procure a personal benefit contrary to an individual's duty
to their employer or the rights of another. Common examples include
accepting kickbacks, demanding extortion or engaging in
conflicts of interest. Financial statement fraud
involves the intentional misrepresentation of financial
or nonfinancial information to mislead others who are
relying on it to make economic decisions. Common examples include
overstating revenues, or understating
liabilities or expenses. A common thread in all of these
types of fraud are that they can occur in any organization
regardless of what industry they are in. But there are a number of
other schemes that are industry specific. For example, financial
institutions suffer from schemes involving mortgage loans and
new accounts just to name a few. Healthcare insurers see numerous
schemes related to false billing and misrepresentations
of diagnoses. The securities industry is
subject to Ponzi schemes, insider trading, and
misrepresentations by brokers. Therefore, each industry is
subject to its own particular forms of fraud. Unfortunately, there is no area
of any organization or any type of commerce where there is
not the potential for fraud. Dr. Richard Riley, PhD: So far,
we have developed the definition of fraud and we have examine
the major categories of fraud. One of the questions asked
is how does fraud examination differ from auditing? Aren't they the same? What about the term
"forensic accounting?" How is it different from
auditing and fraud examination? This circle presents a Venn
diagram developed by the NIJ's task force to develop a model
curriculum for FAFI education. As noted in the circle, auditing
is a term many are familiar with. Auditing includes steps to
plan the audit, conduct risk assessment, identify and test
internal controls for both design and implementation and
then develop the necessary audit evidence and finally report
on the findings of the audit. In some audits, the auditor may
discover symptoms suggestive of fraud. In those circumstances, the
audit intersects with fraud examination using the techniques
developed to define the who, what, when, where, and how
the fraud took place, but also notice that fraud examination
includes prevention and deterrence efforts as well as
detection and investigation. Finally, fraud investigation
also includes remediation, which is cleaning up the mess. Remediation can include
addressing internal controls issues, helping the victim
to file insurance claims when appropriate and even
testifying in court. Testifying in court - that's
where fraud investigation intersects with
forensic accounting. The term "forensic" generally
suggests that the issue will end up being resolved in court. Thus, forensic chemistry, for
example, is an issue related to chemistry where the chemist will
be testifying to evidence in a court of law. Forensic accounting, then,
implies that we have an accounting issue where
accounting provides evidence that may shed light
on a legal matter. So, in short, forensic
accounting is the intersection between accounting and the law. As you can see, some fraud
examination efforts might end up in court, but others, like
prevention and deterrence will not. Further, now that you understand
the differences, it also becomes easier to see those differences
as well as how these three terms overlap. According to the ACFE, average
losses from fraud total about 5% of gross domestic
produce or GDP. When that 5% is applied to
actual economic production, total losses from fraud may
be as high as 3.5 trillion worldwide. In the United States alone,
losses may total a trillion dollars. Now this number is currently the
best available estimate and most likely includes all losses from
stealing paper clips and copy paper from the office to the
most expensive frauds, financial statement fraud, which in the
case of Enron, cost in the neighborhood of 60 billion
of market capitalization. What is more disturbing, at
least to me, is the frequency of large dollar fraud to
a single organization. According to the ACFE data, 21%
of the cases include in the most recent report, cost the victims
more than one million dollars. In 32% of the cases, the
losses were at least $400,000. Those dollar figures are large
enough to wipe out a small business. The information brings out
a very important point. Don't let your organization
become a victim because it could be a fatal event. Small businesses, and
particularly small charities and not for profits, in many cases
cannot afford to become victims of fraud. The financial losses to
organizations do not begin to reflect the entire cost. The day after Enron filed for
bankruptcy, 5000 employees were fired, and many more of the 21
thousand employees were expected to lose their jobs as the
bankruptcy process continued. Enron employees lost two
billion, averaging 95 thousand per person in their
pension plans. Many persons losing their
entire life savings. The highly publicized Bernard
Madoff scam cost investors 17.3 billion. According to the COSO analysis
of public companies, of the 347 publicly traded companies that
were victimized by financial statement fraudsters, 28% of
the firms filed for bankruptcy within two years and 47% were
delisted from a national stock exchange. Employees lost their jobs. Communities lost tax collections
and stockholders lost their investment savings. Madoff's scheme literally wiped
out his clients' life savings Some of Madoff's victims, who
may have planned a productive, fun filled retirement, may end
up working til the day they take
167
00:09:13,834
their final breath.