Natalie Luna: Money laundering
is the process by which a person takes illegally obtained money
and conceals its existence, source, or location and then
disguises that income to make it appear legitimate. It is estimated that as much as
300 billion dollars worldwide is laundered each year. Jonathan Turner: The key
concept in money laundering is legitimization. In other words, I've got to be
able to take criminal proceeds and be able to portray them
as legitimate proceeds. The easiest way for me to do
that is to move them through otherwise legitimate businesses. So if I can take the proceeds
from an illicit activity and use those to purchase dishwashers,
for example, and then sell those dishwashers, I can then claim
the income from the sale of the dishwashers. So we're going to have lots
of legitimate manufacturers, distribution places, but
most importantly, the biggest category is banks. When I get a cashier's check
from a bank, it doesn't say "illicit proceeds." It says "guaranteed funds." Phil Manuel: You can also
buy securities, you can buy cashier's checks, you can
establish real estate trusts and put the money here
in the United States. There are just any number of
ways that you can use this money to launder the proceeds so that
it becomes useful money to you down the road. That first tier of movement
is the most important. Once a criminal, or someone with
criminally derived money, gets past that first crucial step
of taking the cash or the money that's illegally derived and
putting it into a legitimate institution, once he takes that
step, then the whole world is his oyster in terms of where he
can invest, what he can invest in, and he's limited only by
his ingenuity and his business acumen as to how he's going
to move from that point. JT: You could catch a money
launderer at any of the stages. If you think about it, they have
a risk in each place and the risk is going to be different. So depending on the
sophistication of the money launderer, placement is
obviously very risky. It's getting the illicit cash
into the banking system or into the business system itself. The layering process is going to
involve multiple transactions, each one of which
could get discovered. And then of course, the
final part is integration. If you are living a lifestyle
above your means, that's an opportunity for discovery. So money laundering is often
caught at one stage or another and unfortunately, money
laundering is often caught because of an unrelated crime. PM: Cash now is a
magnet for suspicion. All merchants, all automobile
dealers, all jewelry dealers, anybody selling anything of
value has to declare with the government, on a special form,
whether they've received over $10,000 for payment of any
type of merchandise or service. Dennis Lormel: That's why we
have reporting requirements. That's why we have currency
transaction reports. Any transaction greater than
$10,000 has to be reported and the premise for that was drug
money laundering years ago. So what the bad guys have done
is they go below that threshold. They don't want to be detected
and they don't want a currency transaction report
filed against them. What they are doing is they are
coming in and putting $9500 or $9000. It's usually a round amount but
it's an amount under $10,000. And what's happened over time
is money launderers are like fraudsters are adaptable. They understand that when the
banks or law enforcement put mechanisms into place to
identify what they're doing, these guys are going to take
other steps to avoid detection and look for other ways that
they can exploit the system. So, like with money laundering,
instead of that $9000 threshold, what the money launderers
will do, they'll what we call "microstructure" and they'll
break those transactions down into two or three thousand
dollar increments. Now if they're going to do that,
and they have the resources and capability to do that, those 2
and $3000 transactions are going to be so difficult to detect as
the proceeds of money laundering and basically what financial
institutions have now, they have pretty robust software money
laundering systems in place because of the bank secrecy act
and the reporting requirements, banks are mandated to have a
robust money laundering program, but again, because of the
totality of transactions and the versatility of the bad guys,
because of their adaptability and flexibility, it becomes very
challenging on the part of the bankers to be able
identify this. JT: One of the money launderer's
favorite techniques is the wire transfer. The wire transfer allows him to
move many anywhere around the world instantly. Wire transfers were always
popular because otherwise you had to carry cash or you had
to mail checks, whereas a wire transfer is instantaneous. But in ltoday's technology
driven world, it's even more popular. You could have a money launderer
sitting with his laptop logged into multiple online banking
sites at one time, wiring funds back and forth between the
various accounts, all from one computer. The best part about the
wire transfer is it's almost impossible to track, because I
wire transire money to a safe haven, maybe the British Virgin
Islands, possibly Switzerland, the Isle of Man, anywhere around
the world, and from there I withdraw it as cash and then
deposit it again and wire it somewhere else. After making these transfers
multiple times, it makes it very difficult for somebody to
follow my steps because I'm in a different jurisdiction with
a different law enforcement requirement, with different
court issues, all of which makes it much harder, and by the time
you get to me, it only takes 30 seconds to move the money again. PM: The businesses that you want
to look for, in terms of hiding money, especially cash money,
are high intensity cash businesses. Historically, the best
businesses for moving cash in and out would be restaurants,
bars, theaters, businesses which take a lot of cash and where
the infusion of cash is very difficult to separate from the
sales of the institution itself. Restaurants and bars and
theaters, bowling alleys, all meet this criteria. You establish yourself a
friendly banker, one who will take this cash money. You take the cash, you
deposit it in the bank. It's not a good idea to do it
in your own name, but you're probably going to establish an
offshore corporation to which you will deposit these funds These lawyers in offshore
locations often have a shelf of shell corporations that they
use for the specific purpose of assisting someone who wants to
do a financial transaction in an offshore place and does
not want to be discovered. Confidentiality in offshore
places is often regarded as a very, very legitimate function. They view it as ensuring
privacy, not assisting the criminal. Your favorite countries are
going to be those that have created that type of tax
haven offshore protection. There are any number in the
Caribbean, southern United States area, off the southern
coast of the United States starting with Bermuda, the
Bahamas, Grand Cayman, the Turk and Caicos Islands, Panama has
probably become the biggest banking center ssince money
laundering laws were established in the United States. It seems like banks have sprung
up all over the place in Panama. You have Antigua. You have just any number of
places where these banking laws are favorable to the
potential money launderer. JT: Money launderers can use a
variety of techniques besides wiring money to transfer
their money around the world. They can physically carry
cash, but that gets bulky. One of the techniques is to
physically carry checks, money orders, and other financial
documents to transfer funds in those means. Travelers checks used to be used
but travelers checks in this day and age are fading from view. It's much more common to see
them use cashier's checks and money orders, because even
though there is reporting requirements at certain dollar
levels, you can buy a lot of them. PM: You go into any place that
sells them and you buy multiple $200 money orders and you can
fill a shoebox full and now you have a million dollars in cash
that you can transport by mail, in person, or by common carrier,
anywhere around the world. Many people mail cash. As simple as it is, mailing of
cash outside the United States is a very common thing. Putting cash in containers of
merchandise that are being taken out of the United States by
ship or by plane is another very common way to get cash
out of the country. It's a very simple process if
you want to risk the discovery of the cash and the
confiscation of it. Illicit money moves in the
same way and through the same channels as does
legitimate money. And once it gets out of the
country, it can be used in any type of investment which
is seemingly legitimate. It can come back to
the Units States. Taxes can be paid and the
criminal gets the benefit of
178
00:09:16,667
that circuit.