[MUSIC] To better understand why people commit
fraud, consider the fraud triangle. A model developed by Donald Cressy,
a Sociologist and Criminologist that studied the behavior
of white colour criminals. The Fraud Triangle is based
on the premise that for an ordinary individual to commit fraud,
three components must exist. There must be a perceived pressure,
a perceived opportunity, and a rationalization. Let's spend a few minutes looking
at each of these components, the first leg of the triangle
represents pressure. This pressure does not
need to actually exist. A perceived pressure is real to
the individual committing fraud. A potential fraudster must feel
that the pressure is non-sharable, that it must be dealt with alone. The individual usually believes that the
problem is impossible to resolve legally. And if the problem continues, the ultimate
result will be financial collapse. Frequently, the current issue
is related to a personal or external problem such as excessive debt or
loss of employment. Many of the problems originate with
vices such as drug or alcohol abuse, gambling, extramarital affairs or
living beyond ones means. Perceived pressures are a challenge for
the forensic auditors to deal with. Because the auditors have limited
contact with the individuals, and therefore have no baseline for
the symptoms of the problem for which the fraudster is dealing. The second leg of the fraud
triangle related to opportunity. Before an individual commits fraud, there
must be the perception of an opportunity to take advantage of the system
without being caught. Allowing removing the pressure in secret. The primary source of
opportunity relates to poor or inadequate internal controls within
the organizations financial system. We'll talk about internal
controls in detail next week. But basically,
internal controls only allow an individual to access the specific task required for
that individual's job. Separation of duties are a set
of controls that split accounting functions among various
people to prevent problems. Collusion exists when two or
more people cooperate or collude to get access to each
other's parts of the system. Combined they have
the opportunity to commit fraud, where individually neither
had that opportunity. For example, when someone that has
the authority to order an item, but not approve payment the item,
teams up with or colludes with an individual that has
the authority to approve payment. But not to order the items, together
through collusion, they can order and pay for items that are not related
to the organization’s mission. You can see why collusion
is difficult to detect, everyone is doing their individual job. Another difficult to address issue is management's opportunity to
override internal controls. Management with full authority
within the system can override or ignore controls that are in place. This is a difficult issue because
employees that see what’s going on may not have a framework to report the problem
other than to their manager. And we know that if the manager is the
problem, that reporting will not happen. Other items that relate to the fraudster's
perception to opportunity include poor or inadequate training. Which often leads to the defense,
I did not know any better. Another is lack of supervision. People are less likely to identify
a situation as an opportunity if they're adequately supervised. Unfortunately, opportunities
are identified and taken advantage of when organizations do not prosecute fraudsters
or have otherwise weak ethical cultures. If the tone of the organization is to
look the other way when a problem occurs someone with a perceived pressure will
likely find opportunities to commit fraud. The last leg of the fraud
triangle is rationalization. People are generally honest,
fraud involves theft. To prevent fraudsters from
perceiving themselves as criminals, there is rationalization. Rationalization helps
justify the crime in a way that makes in acceptable
in the mind of a fraudster. One of the most common rationalizations
is I deserved it, or they owe it to me. Employees that believe that they're
underplayed or otherwise financially taken advantage of, frequently use
this form of rationalization. They treat me bad is a non-financial
variation of the I deserve it rationalization. Another rationalization is
I'm just borrowing the money, mainly it's much easier to
justify borrowing than stealing. The problem is that the pressure to
take the money is usually not gone when repayment needs to be made so
the borrower never repays the debt. Another problem with this excuse is that
when one borrows it's only reasonable for the lender to know about the transaction. The final rationalization
where mention is, it's not my fault, which is used
to transfer blame to someone else. This can be used in many circumstances,
those prevalent when the individual has access to
something that should be protected. For example, a computer is found logged on
in the company's pay maintenance screen. The rationalization is not my fault, someone left the computer unattended,
enabling me to change my pay rate. The fundamental premise of
the fraud triangle suggests that when an ordinary person or
accidental fraudster commits fraud, all three of the legs of
the triangle must be present. There must be a perceived problem
that cannot be shared or pressure. Additionally, there must
be an opportunity available that the fraudster believes can
be used to solve the problem. And finally,
the person will rationalize the fraud, to help in the denial
that the action is wrong. Understanding the fraud triangle, helps
us understand the person behind the fraud as well as helping us in
the detection of the fraud. Now that you understand
the fraud triangle, it may be obvious to you that the easiest
leg to address is opportunity. >> When trying to provide
an understanding of fraudsters, this example from
the Wall Street Journal was perfect. While the article appeared in 2005,
the lessons learned are timeless. The alleged perpetrator pictured is
a man by the name of Thomas Coughlin. Before his alleged fraud came to light,
Mr. Coughlin was the Vice Chairman of Walmart. So there's the chairman of the board, vice
chair and then the executive management. Mr. Coughlin is basically
second in command. According to the article, he needed
some alligator boots, a dog pen, and a hunting vacation. Now a question, is it appropriate
to ask Walmart to pay for this? As fraud examiners and forensic
accountants, we need to be careful. Depending upon Mr.
Coughlin's terms of employment, his contract Walmart Travel and
Entertainment policies. It is possible that he was entitled
to reimbursement for the cost. However, the Wall Street Journal article
would suggest that reimbursements were not in compliance with Walmart policies. Because Mr. Coughlin used false
documentation and fake invoices so the expenses would qualify. As a side note, it's the deception,
the act of concealment, that convinces fraud examiners that the perpetrator
knew his or her actions were wrong. If they were not wrong,
why attempt to hide the act? Back to Mr. Coughlin, according to
the article, estimates suggest that Mr. Coughlin may have defrauded Walmart by
as much as $500,000 over three years. Mr. Coughlin never admitted
any wrongdoing, so the actual amounts may never be known. If we assume $500,000 over three years that works out to be about
150 to 175,000 per year. Where this story gets
interesting is the following. In your mind, guess how much Mr. Coughlin
made in salary and bonus in a single year, before he resigned in disgrace and
was tried in court for his act. How much salary and bonus? $6 million dollars, yes,
$6 million, at some level, it appears that Mr. Coughlin was
willing to sacrifice everything. His income, his employment,
and his reputation, for an extra 150 to 175,000 per year. Does that make sense to you? There are couple of important lessons. One, do not inflict your values system
when trying to understand what others might do, often times fraud in related
financial crime do not make sense. When examining the facts and circumstances and evidence of a fraud,
always keep an open mind. Follow the evidence, document
the evidence, and do not make assumptions. Use the evidence to determine who,
what, when, where, and how. Mr. Coughlin is a great example
of the accidental fraudster. The typical fraudster is often
depicted as the first time offender, who is doing something
seemingly out of character. The Fraud Triangle suggest
that the perpetrator has a non-sharable problem that is
grounded in financial short comings. And when align with opportunities
in rationalization, and otherwise good citizen
succumbs to committing fraud. This person might be characterized
as the accidental fraudster. Not withstanding the fraud act, the
accidental fraudster is considered to be a good, law abiding person who
under normal circumstances would never consider theft,
breaking felonious laws or harm others. When discovered, family members, fellow
employees, and others in the community are surprised or even shocked by
the perpetrator's alleged behavior. Cressey's fraud triangle hypothesis helps
the anti-fraud community understand the accidental of fraudster.