I'm Barry Minkow, president
of ZZZZ Best Carpet Cleaning. Your carpets deserve the care
and expertise of our licensed, bonded, and insured technicians. So call now. I'll guarantee the work
and the price, in writing. Narrator: At the age of 16,
Barry Minkow started a carpet cleaning service in his garage. It never made a legitimate
profit so he decided to cook the books. Within 5 years, his scheme had
unraveled and he was sentenced to 25 years in prison for
defrauding investors of over $100,000,000. BM: Well, basically the fraud
was we had a carpet, furniture, and drapery cleaning
that was legitimate. We owed a lot of money to a lot
of people, borrowed to expand on the way up. I couldn't get bank loans a lot
very easily and I got caught up in usurous loans, borrowed
from Peter to pay Paul. In the process of getting caught
in those usurous loans, I got myself in debt and began to
perpetrate a restoration fraud, a fraud that would say I'm
making more money than I'm making and I need to borrow
more money than I would need to borrow if my company
were legitimate. So I needed what we
call a built in excuse. Why are you always
short of money? I got these restoration jobs. And I had to fool accountants
and auditors into believing that those numbers were real before
I could perpetrate that fraud. No one loans money to a company
that's losing money so I had to be profitable in the
process of needing money. So all that was the crux and
the foundation for the fraud. What I did was I created false
vendors, like Marbil Marketing or Tuftex and created invoices
and created literal front companies who I could
show money going to. Well, accounts receivable
are a wonderful thing. They are a tool that is used by
a fraudster like me to ask to borrow money mainly
and show earnings. So I can borrow money, hey, look
at these receivables and I could show earnings because once you
book the receivable, you're already accounting for the
income and you're showing earnings. So what I need to do is create
a receivable and because I had this company that we were doing
these insurance frauds from and I had their letterhead, I could
make up any letter and any invoice saying that they owed
me money for doing this job. I could take some checks from
the past and say that they were supplies from the job and I
could piecemeal it together, the detail stuff along the way. Bingo. I have a receivable. You take the checkbook of the
phony setup company, "Interstate Appraisal Services." So you have an invoice,
7727, $300,000, net 60. You got a check that says
7727, "job well done." The check's there, here's the
check and I tie in a $300,000 deposit off the bank statement
that was deposited on the same day that check dates, there's
the deposit, really the deposit was to do a kite, but it tied
together so nicely, what do they know? You know the restoration
business was maybe 80% of the income that I earned, allegedly
but 80% of the due diligence that I tried to get the auditors
and the lawyers to look at was the carpet cleaning end of the
business which was legitimate. I'm going to be nice
to those auditors. I had them over for dinner. I went to their
houses for dinner. I wanted their wives to know me
so if they had a go against me, they had to hear their wives to
say "I think he's such a nice boy." I wanted to make sure if they
were going to go against me they were going to go
against their own wives. Does he want to go back to his
clients and the manager and everybody and say they lost the
ZZZZ best account because they wanted to be petty? Because they set the ground
rules and we abided by them? Do they want to lose
the ZZZZ Best account? No, they don't want to lose
the ZZZZ Best account and I leveraged that to the hilt, too. So you got to
remember something. Yes, want to get to know your
client, but you want to remain your objectivity and I believe
the auditor's responsibility is to give up the $100,000 a year
fee to prevent the sixteen million dollar fraud. If they're going to mail a
confirmation to the bank, fine. We don't care what it says our
balance is, our average balance is, and how much we owe. That wasn't where the
fraud was happening. The fraud was happening with
three banks, kiting checks bank and forth, inflating
a false balance. The loan payment, heck. If you make a loan payment, you
know what's the problem there? There's just no accountability. The auditors are being cheated,
I believe, by not getting enough information from them. They doubted the financial
wherewithall of ZZZZ Best, I pointed them to the stock price. Although the auditors are not
supposed to look at that, you can't ignore a stock that goes
from 5 cents to 18 dollars. You know, hey, these are
Wall Street analysts. They know due diligence. They know numbers. Don't you think they would have
found something out if there was something to be found out? And by having all these people,
the media, lawyers, Wall Street, the financial analysts, the
stock brokers, all hyped about ZZZZ Best, I basically boxed the
accounting firm in a corner and said, you're not going to be
the only rotten apple, are you? What are you going to need
to satisfy yourself and I'll satisfy you to fill your file. Without putting the pressure on
the auditors, you've got to pull yourself away from the numbers
and hindsight is wonderful, you know, to look back and everybody
says, how could you have been fooled by Barry Minkow? How could anyone have fallen
for the old fraudulent building restoration scam? Or an old Ponzi scheme? Well, very easily. The press says I'm gold. The banks said I was gold. I had Hughes, Hubbard,
and Reed as my lawyers. I was doing well on Wall Street
and I leveraged my auditors. I believe a company that makes
a million a year, well, where's the money going to? If he's making a million a year,
why is he continuing to lease his equipment? I know the answer will be
because he wants to expand and use that money for expansion but
that just doesn't make a whole heck of a lot of sense. Either he's reinvesting it
in the company or it's going somewhere. Where's that million going to? So highly leveraged owned
assets and unbelievable growth. It's very rare. You know, the computer
business, perhaps. The software business, maybe,
anything else, hardly ever, that you're going to see a 4 million
dollar company go to a 40 million dollar company overnight
unless it's a fad of some kind. Watch that guy with the big ego. Watch that guy who loves to be
on the screen because that's the guy who will do anything to keep
his name in the paper and in print. Watch the guy whose stock's
going crazy and very high profile because that's the guy
that will lie on a 10Q rather than suffer his stock going
lower because his earnings were down. Watch that guy. Watch that guy that has no
respect for anyone but himself. A fraudulent situation is
always in need for money. Yes I know that entrepreneurs
are growing businesses out there and they are also in need
of money but there's one difference. The fraudulent man has to have
that money because he owes someone else or is holding
something together and he has to expand and he has to grow
because that expansion and growth are excuses for
the need of his money. The entrepreneur on the other
hand, will have enough business sense to be able to say, maybe
growth is not what I need right now because the the
finances aren't available. The banks aren't looking at me. I need some more track record. Because his business is
real, he can wait a year.
162
00:08:06,400
If somebody said wait a year
to me, I would have been under.