[Music] John Gill: Is there a profile
of the common fraudster? Not really, but there are
common demographics that can be analyzed to give us some
insight into fraud perpetrators. Every two years, the Association
of Certified Fraud Examiners conducts a global survey of its
members about cases they had experienced. By looking at this data, we
can develop a list of the most common factors. As you can see from the ACFE
survey, males commuted more frauds than females. The perpetrator is typically
well educated and a member of management. They are a first time offender
and occupy trusted positions at work and in the community. An important concept in
understanding fraud is organizational opportunity. This is the concept that how
much or how often an individual commits fraud depends on how
much opportunity he has to do so in the organizational hierarchy. Think of it this way. Who has the better opportunity
to steal large amounts of money at a bank? The teller or the
bank president? If you review the typical
demographic, you see that it is consistent with upper
management at most companies. However, as the population
demographics change and organizational demographics
evolve, it is expected that these characteristics will
change as well, but it is important to understand that
fraud happens at all levels and the higher an individual is
within an organization, the greater the opportunity
to commit fraud. Although the fraud triangle is
important in understanding some of the motivations to commit
fraud, it is not meant to cover every situation. You should also consider some of
the other motivations that cause people to do dishonest things. It can be summarized in
the acronym MICE, M-I-C-E. A desire for money is a
motivating factor for many types of crimes. The individual may have large
debts or gambling losses or just an overwhelming desire
for expensive things. Fraud can be seen as a
convenient way to fund an extravagant lifestyle. For some people, the path to
fraud may be based on a certain ideology. They may feel that they
are not treated fairly. For example, an individual may
resent the CEO who makes tens of millions in bonuses when she
hasn't had a decent raise in years. She may feel that fraud is a way
to even the balance of wealth. It is not unusual to be coerced
into committing a fraud. A supervisor may coerce
employees into inflating sales or numbers, or paying bribes
to obtain contracts so that the department will meet its goals. The employee feels threatened or
pressured to commit wrongdoing or lose his job. And finally, some fraudsters
have enormous egos. They feel that they are smarter
than those around them and that they are entitled to
positions of power and wealth. These individuals see fraud as
just a means to obtaining what they feel they are entitled to. Of course, there may be several
motivations that play in any one case. The key is to understand that
there are many factors that can motivate people to commit fraud. In addition to understanding the
motivations to commit fraud, the fraud examiner and management
should be alert to some of the behovely red flags
related to fraud. This chart shows some of
the most common behavioral characteristics that were
present in fraud cases in the ACV's report of
the nation survey. As you can see, the two most
common characteristics were the individual living beyond his
means and experiencing financial difficulties. This is consistent with the
desire for money related to financial pressure, one of the
legs of the fraud triangle. The presence of family problems
or drug addiction were also common red flags, but notice
some of the other factors; an unusually close association with
a vendor can be a red flag of a bribery or kickback scheme. Unwillingness to share duties
or take vacations can be signs a person is working to keep the
fraud hidden and can't risk anyone else getting involved
with his or her business. Pressure from within the
organization or coercion is sometimes present as well. As you would expect, people
that have a large ego or feel entitled to wealth would have
many of the characteristics on this list, including complaints
about adequate pay, complaints about lack of lack of
authority, instability in life circumstances, and past
employment or legal problems. To be sure, the presence of any
of these red flags does not mean that fraud is occurring, but
they do occur in a number of cases, therefore it is certainly
prudent to be observant. Use these characteristics along
with other factors to determine if fraud may exist. Dr. Richard Dull, PhD: Financial
forensics is the intersection of financial principles
and the law. It applies the technical
skills of accounting, auditing, quantitative methods,
law, and research. Investigative skills are
required for the collection, analysis and
evaluation of evidence. Critical thinking is required
to interpret and communicate the results of an investigation. Critical thinking, sometimes is
referred to as lateral thinking or thinking outside the box and
is a disciplined approach to problem solving. It's used as a foundation to
guide our thought process and related actions. Let's consider the following
case as an example. Everything needed to answer the
question "how did they die?" is contained in the
following passage. [Reading words on screen] With this information,
determine how they died. Here's a clue. List all of your assumptions
from the example. This exercise requires you
to guard against jumping to conclusions while the fraud
examiner or forensic accountant needs to think critically. The direction of the
investigation is often guided by assumptions. The difficult challenge is
not the questioning of the assumptions that the
investigators identified, but the assumptions the investigator
is subconsciously making without even realizing it. That's why it's important
that the investigator must continually challenge the
investigative approach and outcomes to assure that the
investigation is moving toward a resolution, a resolution that
stands up to the scrutiny of others. Back to the example. Most students assume that
Anthony and Cleopatra are people when in the scenario
they are actually fish. Once the assumption of people is
eliminated, the solution comes much more easily. Let's review the reasons
for critical thinking. People who commit fraud
do not think like us. We need to be flexible in how we
approach other people's worlds. We have to consider each little
piece of data individually because one fact may put
everything into perspective. Keep digging and gathering
information until you have adequate explanations. Our first class has covered
a wide range of interrelated topics, beginning with the
working definition of fraud. From there, we looked at the
financial impact of fraud on organizations in society and
then some nonfinancial problems caused by fraud. We then discussed the fraud
triangle and the accidental fraudster, both helping you
better understand the thought process of an individual
that commits fraud. We finished the day with a
discussion of the skills needed to be a forensic professional. You can find more information on
this week's topics on the West Virginia University and
Association of Certified Fraud Examiner websites. Thank you for your
participation today. We look forward to working with
you again next week and helping with your understanding of
forensic accounting and fraud
159
00:08:28,800
examination.