Before the course ends, I would like to leave you with two of my
favorite quotes the first is very old it's from Confucius he reportedly wrote: "To see the see the right and not to do it is cowardice." I think this is a good lesson to put forth in your whistleblower training. It is very easy to sit back and not get involved and unfortunately that's what many people do. But it's not okay to just sit silently by and watch while fraud in other misconduct occurr. To not report fraud or wrongdoing is
cowardice. The second quote is my favorite. Its
attributed to Edmund Burke who was an 18th century Irish
philosopher he wrote "The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing." I think that speaks to all of us in the fraud prevention profession.
Fighting fraud requires a lot of time, effort, and vigilance. But for those a
of us in the anti-fraud profession, standing back and doing nothing is not
an option. If good people do nothing fraud will triumph. It provides a sense of satisfaction to know that you are doing what you can to prevent the triumph of fraud in the workplace. On behalf of the Association of
Certified Fraud Examiners I wish you well in your efforts to prevent and detect fraud. As I close I have two thoughts that I'd like to leave with you. First
from my perspective working as a forensic examiner is
sometimes an emotionally challenging job. In addition to the victims losses, we
also see the impact on the lives of the fraudster and his or her family. Fraud is never a
good solution to the pressures and problems faced by an individual or organization Sophocles the ancient Greek playwright is quoted as saying: "Things gained through unjust fraud are never secure." One of our jobs as forensic
investigators is to make sure that the quote is true.
That the benefits of the fraud are not secure and fraudsters are not
able to keep what they've stolen. The second thought is
from the perspective a businessperson, employee or anyone
associated with any organization. Samuel Johnson English poet critic and writer once said: "Fraud and falsehood only dread examination. Truth invites it. " If an act you're considering would cause
you to dread examination then rethink the action. Consult with a
trusted friend or advisor and determine why you would not want it to
be examined. If it's because the action is fraudulent
make a different decision one that you'd be happy to explain to
the public or ultimately to a judge. Thank you for your interest in our course. I sincerely hope we've left you with
ideas to enrich our understanding of the topic. Best wishes for your future forensic
accounting and fraud examination studies. We've enjoyed our weeks with you during this MOOC. We close with some final thoughts from
some of the great thinkers across time. I chose to feature to the United States
founding fathers. First, Benjamin Franklin wrote: "Only a virtuous people are capable of freedom." One of my other favorite founding fathers, Thomas Jefferson suggested that: "In matters of style, swim with the current; In matters of principle, stand like a rock. …The price of freedom is eternal vigilance." We have spent several weeks with you and hopefully exposed you to the: who,
what, where and how of fraud. At times we even offered
some insight into why people commit fraud, especially seemingly good persons who
make a bad decision. Each of us is on the front line in the
fight against fraud. It's a tough battle and it's incredibly
hard on the victims, those who directly lose money, as well as
the company's coworkers family and friend who trusted
the perpetrator. Best of luck with your own anti-fraud
efforts we hope you enjoyed the fraud related content, and we hope that you feel like you have
a few new skills for your toolbox.