I realized that the authorities,
how they catch you is they follow the money and if they're
going to follow the money to a dead end, for example they go
to a bank and they say "Who owns this bank account?" and it's Polly Prostitute
address unknown, it's going to be awfully hard to find her. And about the same person who
has the post office box and the DBA, it's going to be awfully
hard to find that person. When the checks would come to
the mail drop address, I would sneak over there like 2 or 3 in
the morning, because you know, you get a key to the front door
and a key to the box, and I'd make sure nobody was around. I'd get the checks out and then
I would put the checks in the night depository so that
nobody would ever see me. I'd put on my surgical gloves
because you know that paper gives off a very
good fingerprint. After money was deposited into
one account, a check would be written and put into another
one and another one so if the authorities were to follow me
they would have to go from bank to bank to bank and law
enforcement agents do not like to work. The longer you make them work,
the harder you make them work, the more they are going to go on
to another case, especially in a big city like Los Angeles. I would purchase stock through
company checks and then have that converted into cash by
selling the stock and having the check made out to a person
who would then cash the check. So what you would do is
you would receive my check. I'd buy stock, let's say in
Microsoft or a solid company and then after a little while I
would sell all the stock, maybe leaving a little bit of it left. Well the stock brokerage firm
would write a check to anyone you want to for the sale of the
stock, whatever you had in your account. That could go into one account
and that account could write a check into another account and
it just makes the trail a lot harder to find. You find a branch manager at
your bank and you befriend him and you offer him amounts of
cash that when you come in and cash a check or receive cash,
$80,000 or $100,000 that he's going to lose that
report or not file one. I took a risk. I wanted to have money. I wanted to have power. I wanted it all and
it's not worth it. All the millions I made, all the
fun that I thought I had, it's
47
00:02:30,800
not worth it